Perioperative Management of
Antithrombotic Therapy
An American College of Chest Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline
James D. Douketis, MD, FCCP; Alex C. Spyropoulos, MD, FCCP; M. Hassan Murad, MD, MPH; Juan I. Arcelus, MD;
William E. Dager, PharmD; Andrew S. Dunn, MD, MPH; Ramiz A. Fargo, MD, FCCP; Jerrold H. Levy, MD;
C. Marc Samama, MD; Sahrish H. Shah, MBBS; Matthew W. Sherwood, MD; Alfonso J. Tafur, MD; Liang V. Tang, MD;
and Lisa K. Moores, MD, FCCP
BACKGROUND: The American College of Chest Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline on the
Perioperative Management of Antithrombotic Therapy addresses 43 Patients-Interventions-
Comparators-Outcomes (PICO) questions related to the perioperative management of pa-
tients who are receiving long-term oral anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy and require an
elective surgery/procedure. This guideline is separated into four broad categories, encom-
passing the management of patients who are receiving: (1) a vitamin K antagonist (VKA),
mainly warfarin; (2) if receiving a VKA, the use of perioperative heparin bridging, typically
with a low-molecular-weight heparin; (3) a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC); and (4) an
antiplatelet drug.
METHODS: Strong or conditional practice recommendations are generated based on high, mod-
erate, low, and very low certainty of evidence using the Grading of Recommendations, Assess-
ment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology for clinical practice guidelines.
RESULTS: A multidisciplinary panel generated 44 guideline recommendations for the peri-
operative management of VKAs, heparin bridging, DOACs, and antiplatelet drugs, of which
two are strong recommendations: (1) against the use of heparin bridging in patients with
atrial ﬁbrillation; and (2) continuation of VKA therapy in patients having a pacemaker or
internal cardiac de ﬁbrillator implantation. There are separate recommendations on the
perioperative management of patients who are undergoing minor procedures, comprising
dental, dermatologic, ophthalmologic, pacemaker/internal cardiac de ﬁbrillator implantation,
and GI (endoscopic) procedures.
CONCLUSIONS: Substantial new evidence has emerged since the 2012 iteration of these
guidelines, especially to inform best practices for the perioperative management of patients
who are receiving a VKA and may require heparin bridging, for the perioperative manage-
ment of patients who are receiving a DOAC, and for patients who are receiving one or more
antiplatelet drugs. Despite this new knowledge, uncertainty remains as to best practices for
the majority of perioperative management questions. CHEST 2022; 162(5):e207-e243
KEY WORDS: antithrombotic therapy; bleeding; perioperative care; surgery; thrombosis
ABBREVIATIONS: aPTT = activated partial thromboplastin time;
ASA = aspirin; ATE = arterial thromboembolism; CABG = coronary
artery bypass graft; CHADS 2 = congestive heart failure, hypertension,
age $ 75 years, diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient ischemic
attack; CHA2DS2VASc = congestive heart failure, hypertension, age $
75 years, diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient ischemic attack,
vascular disease history, age $ 65 years, female sex; COI = con ﬂicts of
interest; CrCl = creatinine clearance; DOAC = direct oral
anticoagulant; GRADE = Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation; HR = hazard ratio; INR = international
normalized ratio; LMWH = low-molecular-weight heparin; PICO =
Patients-Interventions-Comparators-Outcomes; RR = relative risk;
UFH = unfractionated heparin; VKA = vitamin K antagonist
AFFILIATIONS: From the Department of Medicine (J. D. D.), St.
Joseph’s Healthcare Hamilton and McMaster University, Hamilton,
[ Education and Clinical Practice Guidelines and Consensus Statements ]
chestjournal.org e207
i An update to this article is included at the end
Summary of Key Recommendations
5. In patients receiving VKA therapy for a mechanical
heart valve who require VKA interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against heparin
bridging (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
6. In patients receiving VKA therapy for atrial
ﬁbrillation who require VKA interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we recommend against
heparin bridging (Strong Recommendation, Moderate
Certainty of Evidence).
7. In patients receiving VKA therapy for VTE as the
sole clinical indication who require VKA interruption
for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against
heparin bridging (Conditional Recommendation, Very
Low Certainty of Evidence).
14. In patients receiving VKA therapy who require a
pacemaker or ICD implantation, we recommend
continuation of VKA over VKA interruption and
heparin bridging (Strong Recommendation, Moderate
Certainty of Evidence).
15. In patients receiving VKA therapy who require
VKA interruption for a colonoscopy with
anticipated polypectomy, we suggest against heparin
bridging during the period of VKA interruption
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
21. In patients receiving LMWH bridging for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against
routine measurement of anti-factor Xa levels to
guide perioperative LMWH management
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
22. In patients receiving apixaban who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
apixaban for 1 to 2 days before the surgery/procedure
over apixaban continuation (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
23. In patients receiving dabigatran who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
dabigatran for 1 to 4 days before the surgery/
procedure over dabigatran continuation
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty
of Evidence).
24. In patients receiving edoxaban who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
edoxaban for 1 to 2 days before the surgery/procedure
over edoxaban continuation (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
25. In patients receiving rivaroxaban who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
rivaroxaban for 1 to 2 days before the surgery/
procedure over rivaroxaban continuation
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
26. In patients who require DOAC interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against
perioperative heparin bridging (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
27. In patients who had DOAC interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest resuming
DOACs > 24 hours after a surgery/procedure over
resuming DOACs within 24 hours (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
28. In patients who had DOAC interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against
routine DOAC coagulation function testing to guide
ON, Canada; Department of Medicine (A. C. S.), Northwell Health at
Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY; Donald and Barbara Zucker
School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell (A. C. S.), Hempstead, NY;
Institute of Health Systems Science at The Feinstein Institutes for
Medical Research (A. C. S.), Manhasset, NY; Mayo Clinic Evidence-
Based Practice Center (M. H. M. and S. H. S.), Rochester, MN;
Department of Surgery (J. I. A.), Facultad de Medicina, University of
Granada, Granada, Spain; Department of Pharmacy (W. E. D.), Uni-
versity of California-Davis, Sacramento, CA; Division of Hospital
Medicine (A. S. D.), Department of Medicine, Mt. Sinai Health System,
New York, NY; Department of Internal Medicine (R. A. F.), Loma
Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA; Department of
Internal Medicine (R. A. F.), Riverside University Health System
Medical Center, Moreno Valley, CA; Department of Anesthesiology,
Critical Care, and Surgery (Cardiothoracic) (J. H. L.), Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, NC; Department of Anaesthesia,
Intensive Care and Perioperative Medicine (C. M. S.), GHU AP-HP,
Centre-Université Paris-Cité-Cochin Hospital, Paris, France; Inova
Heart and Vascular Institute (M. W. S.), Falls Church, VA; Department
of Medicine (A. J. T.), Cardiovascular, NorthShore University
HealthSystem, Evanston, IL; Institute of Hematology (L. V. T.), Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong, University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China; and the F. Edward Hébert School of
Medicine (L. K. M.), Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD.
Drs Douketis and Spyropoulos served as co-primary authors.
DISCLAIMER: American College of Chest Physician guidelines are
intended for general information only, are not medical advice, and do
not replace professional medical care and physician advice, which al-
ways should be sought for any medical condition. The complete
disclaimer for this guideline can be accessed at https://www.chestnet.
org/Guidelines-and-Resources.
CORRESPONDENCE TO: James D. Douketis, MD; email: jdouket@
mcmaster.ca
Copyright /C2112022 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2022.07.025
e208 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
perioperative DOAC management (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
29a. In patients receiving ASA who are undergoing
elective non-cardiac surgery, we suggest ASA
continuation over ASA interruption (Conditional
Recommendation, Moderate Certainty of Evidence).
34. In patients who are receiving ASA and
undergoing CABG surgery, we suggest continuation
of ASA over interruption; in patients receiving a
P2Y12 inhibitor drug, we suggest interruption of the
P2Y12 inhibitor over continuation perioperatively
(Conditional Recommendation, Low Certainty of
Evidence).
36. In patients receiving antiplatelet drug therapy
who are undergoing an elective surgery/procedure,
we suggest against the routine use of platelet
function testing prior to the surgery/procedure to
guide perioperative antiplatelet management
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
38. In patients receiving ASA and a P2Y 12 inhibitor
who had coronary stents placed within the last 3 to
12 months and are undergoing an elective surgery/
procedure, we suggest stopping the P2Y 12 inhibitor
prior to surgery over continuation of the P2Y 12
inhibitor (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
39. In patients with coronary stents who require
interruption of antiplatelet drugs for an elective
surgery/procedure, we suggest against routine
bridging therapy with a glycoprotein IIb-IIIa
inhibitor, cangrelor, or LMWH over routine use of
bridging therapy (Conditional Recommendation, Low
Certainty of Evidence).
Introduction
The perioperative management of antithrombotic
therapy encompasses patients who are receiving a
vitamin K antagonist (VKA), a direct oral
anticoagulant (DOAC), or an antiplatelet drug and
require surgery or an invasive procedure. 1 The scope
of this problem is considerable because anticoagulant
and antiplatelet drugs are widely used for clinical
indications that include atrial ﬁbrillation, VTE,
mechanical heart valves, coronary artery disease, and
peripheral arterial disease. 2 Moreover, this clinical
problem is likely to increase due to an aging
population in whom antithrombotic therapy is widely
used and in whom the need for a surgery/procedure is
most common. 3-7 Approximately 15% to 20% of
patients who are receiving anticoagulant therapy will
require a surgery/procedure annually, 7-10 and 10% to
15% of patients with coronary stents will require
surgery within 2 years of implantation. 11,12
The current American College of Chest Physicians
(CHEST) guidelines on perioperative antithrombotic
management have expanded from previous iterations to
address 43 Patients-Interventions-Comparators-
Outcomes (PICO) questions. New domains that are
addressed include the perioperative management of
patients who are receiving DOACs (also referred to as non-
vitamin K oral anticoagulants), P2Y12 inhibitor antiplatelet
drugs, and guidance on perioperative laboratory
testing.13-15 The target audience for this guideline is the
wide array of clinicians involved in perioperative patient
care, but it is also relevant for researchers to identify areas
of future study, for patients to access a reliable information
resource, and for clinical managers to facilitate the
development of standardized patient care paths.16,17 This
guideline will be updated as new evidence emerges in the
ﬁeld of perioperative antithrombotic management in
accordance with CHEST guideline policies.18
The aims of this practice guideline are: (1) to provide
evidence-based recommendations for the perioperative
management of patients who are receiving antithrombotic
therapy; and (2) to provide practical guidance to clinicians
for managing such patients in the perioperative period.
The PICO questions and guideline statements are
separated into four broad categories to re ﬂect the
dominant patient groups assessed in clinical practice:
/C15 Patients receiving a VKA, focused on warfarin.
/C15 Among patients receiving a VKA, the use of periop-
erative heparin bridging.
/C15 Patients receiving a DOAC.
/C15 Patients receiving an antiplatelet drug.
The PICO questions are further arranged to re ﬂect
practical aspects of perioperative antithrombotic
management, which include:
/C15 Interruption and resumption of VKAs before and
after an elective surgery/procedure, and need for
perioperative heparin bridging.
/C15 For patients in whom heparin bridging is considered,
how to manage pre- and post-operative bridging
during VKA interruption.
chestjournal.org e209
/C15 Interruption and resumption of DOACs before and
after an elective surgery/procedure.
/C15 Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy
around non-cardiac surgery, coronary artery bypass
graft (CABG) surgery, and in patients with cardiac
stents.
/C15 Management of VKAs, DOACs, and antiplatelet
drugs around minor procedures (dental, dermato-
logic, ophthalmologic, GI endoscopy, and cardiac
device implantation, the latter comprising pacemakers
and internal cardiac de ﬁbrillators [ICDs]).
Deﬁnitions of Patient Groups, Antithrombotic
Agents, and Qualifying Remarks
The following de ﬁnitions and qualifying remarks are
aimed at facilitating an understanding of this practice
guideline and the accompanying recommendations.
Patient Groups
For patients who are receiving oral anticoagulant
therapy, the recommendations will pertain to those
patients who have one (or more) of the following clinical
conditions: chronic atrial ﬁbrillation; a mechanical
prosthetic heart valve; or VTE. Although there may be
patients who are receiving anticoagulant therapy for
other conditions (eg, dilated cardiomyopathy), we focus
on the most common indications for anticoagulant
therapy. For patients who are receiving antiplatelet
therapy, the recommendations pertain mainly to
patients who have coronary artery disease and require
non-cardiac surgery, CABG surgery, or percutaneous
coronary interventions and, to a lesser extent, to patients
receiving antiplatelet therapy for secondary prevention
of cardiovascular disease (eg, peripheral or
cerebrovascular disease) who need non-cardiac surgery.
VKAs
Although there are several VKAs available for clinical
use, including warfarin, acenocoumarol, ﬂuindione,
phenprocoumon, and anisindione, 19 the PICO questions
and associated recommendations herein will refer to
warfarin when the term VKA is used because most
evidence has assessed warfarin-treated patients, with few
or no studies involving patients who are receiving other
VKAs.13,14
DOACs
DOACs that are in clinical use comprise the factor Xa
inhibitors apixaban, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban, and the
factor IIa (thrombin) inhibitor dabigatran. 20 As these
drugs differ in pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
properties,21 recommendations that are speci ﬁc for each
DOAC will be made whenever possible based on
evidence from patients who are taking a speci ﬁc DOAC.
Where appropriate, recommendations will be made for
DOACs collectively.
Heparin Bridging
We deﬁne “heparin bridging ” as the administration of a
short-acting anticoagulant, typically a low-molecular-
weight heparin (LMWH) or, less often, unfractionated
heparin (UFH), for an 8- to 10-day perioperative period
during interruption of a VKA when the international
normalized ratio (INR) is below the therapeutic range. 14
We de ﬁne a heparin bridging regimen as a therapeutic-
dose (or full-dose) LMWH (eg, enoxaparin 1 mg/kg bid
or 1.5 mg/kg daily, dalteparin 100 IU/kg bid or 200 IU/
kg daily) or full-dose UFH (eg, to achieve a target
activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] of 1.5- to
2-times the control aPTT or a target anti-factor Xa level
of 0.35-0.70 IU/mL). 22 Although there are intermediate-
dose LMWH regimens (eg, enoxaparin 40 mg bid) that
have been referred to as “bridging,” our de ﬁnition and
associated recommendations pertain to use of
therapeutic-dose heparin bridging where the intent is to
prevent stroke and systemic embolism, referred to in this
guideline as arterial thromboembolism (ATE);
moreover, this is the bridging dose regimen that has
been most widely studied. 1,23 Heparin bridging should
also be distinguished from perioperative use of low-dose
LMWH (eg, enoxaparin 40 mg daily, dalteparin 5,000 IU
daily) that is administered for prophylaxis against
postoperative VTE rather than for the prevention of
ATE.24
Other De ﬁnitions
We de ﬁne the “perioperative period ” or the term
“perioperatively” as the period before and after a
surgery/procedure that, in its entirety, spans from
1 week before until 4 weeks after a surgery/procedure.
This 5-week period is when most adverse thrombotic
and bleeding outcomes may be attributed to
perioperative antithrombotic management. 25 A
“surgery” will refer to an intervention that requires
anesthesia (ie, general, neuraxial, regional block, local)
and may take place with or without overnight
hospitalization, whereas a “procedure” will refer to a
diagnostic, therapeutic, or device-related intervention
that, typically, does not require overnight
hospitalization.
e210 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
Qualifying Remarks
This guideline pertains to patients who are receiving
anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy and require an
elective, non-urgent, surgery/procedure and does not
address patients who require an urgent surgery/
procedure, in whom the management paradigm differs
considerably from that of the elective clinical
setting.26-28 This guideline further pertains to patients
who are receiving long-term, typically $ 3 months,
antithrombotic therapy and focuses on VKAs (warfarin),
DOACs (apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, rivaroxaban),
and antiplatelet drugs (aspirin [ASA], clopidogrel,
prasugrel, ticagrelor). This guideline does not address
the management of drugs with anticoagulant or
antiplatelet properties that are used infrequently (eg,
cilostazol, dipyridamole, pentoxifylline); that, in the case
of DOACs, are used as low-dose regimens (eg,
rivaroxaban 2.5 mg bid); or that, typically, are used for
short periods (eg, nonsteroidal antiin ﬂammatory
drugs).13 Finally, this guideline does not address the
perioperative use of low-dose LWMHs, low-dose
DOACs, or other antithrombotic strategies that are
intended as prophylaxis against postoperative VTE. 24
Practical Aspects of Perioperative
Antithrombotic Management
The management approach described below provides the
foundation upon which the guideline recommendations
have been applied. This perioperative antithrombotic
management approach aims to deliver individualized,
patient-centric care with the intent of minimizing
perioperative thromboembolism and bleeding.
Perioperative antithrombotic management is anchored
on the assessment of patients ’risk for thromboembolism
and surgery/procedure-related bleeding. 1,13,14 The risk
classiﬁcation schemes herein are empiric, requiring
prospective validation, but aim to provide individualized
perioperative management, in particular to help
determine if perioperative anticoagulation interruption
is needed and, if so, among VKA-treated patients, if
heparin bridging is needed.
Assessing Perioperative Risk for Thromboembolism
This involves estimating the risk for ATE, encompassing
stroke and systemic embolism for patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation or a mechanical heart valve, and the risk for
recurrent VTE for patients with a history of VTE with
perioperative interruption of anticoagulant drugs. The
risk classi ﬁcation in Table 1 is empiric and separates
patients according to estimated risk for ATE (high risk:
> 10%/year; intermediate risk: 4%-10%/year; low
risk: < 4%/year) and estimated risk for VTE (high risk:
> 10%/month; intermediate risk: 4%-10%/month; low
risk: < 2%/month); it is derived mainly from studies in a
non-perioperative setting that involved patients with
atrial ﬁbrillation,29-32 a mechanical heart valve, 33-35 or
VTE36-38 who were not receiving anticoagulant therapy
(eg, placebo instead of a VKA in patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation) or less effective antithrombotic therapy (eg,
ASA instead of a VKA in patients with a mechanical
heart valve). 13,14,25 A perioperative risk classi ﬁcation for
patients with coronary artery disease, particularly if they
have coronary stents, is available elsewhere and is also
empiric.39,40
The following qualifying remarks apply to this empiric
risk classi ﬁcation:
/C15 The thromboembolic risk classi ﬁcation herein can
be overridden based on individual patient charac-
teristics. For example, a “low-risk” patient with atrial
ﬁbrillation and a CHA 2DS2VASc score (congestive
heart failure, hypertension, age $ 75 years, diabetes
mellitus, prior stroke or transient ischemic attack,
vascular disease history, age $ 65 years, female
sex) # 4 or a CHADS 2 score (congestive heart
failure, hypertension, age $ 75 years, diabetes
mellitus, prior stroke or transient ischemic
attack) # 2 with a history of perioperative stroke
might be classi ﬁed as “high-risk” and managed
accordingly.13,14
/C15 The type of surgery can affect thromboembolic risk,
especially for patients undergoing cardiovascular
surgery, such as CABG surgery or carotid endarter-
ectomy, in whom the risk for stroke or other
thromboembolism may be higher irrespective of other
patient-related factors. 41-43
/C15 Patients’ thromboembolic risk may be less important
in certain perioperative circumstances. This can occur
in VKA- or DOAC-treated patients or those receiving
antiplatelet therapy who are undergoing a procedure
that does not require anticoagulant or antiplatelet
interruption. Another situation is in patients who are
receiving DOAC therapy, irrespective of the clinical
indication (atrial ﬁbrillation or VTE). Since the peri-
operative time period where such patients are not
anticoagulated is short (1-3 days), this minimizes the
risk for thromboembolism, irrespective of their
baseline risk, as re ﬂected by the CHA 2DS2VASc or
CHADS2 score or proximity of recent VTE and,
similarly, obviates the rationale for administering
heparin bridging.
chestjournal.org e211
Assessing Perioperative Risk for Surgery/
Procedure-Related Bleeding
This involves an assessment of the surgery/procedure-
related bleed risk. The empiric risk classi ﬁcation shown
in Table 2 separates patients into “high,”“ low-to-
moderate,” or “minimal” bleed risk categories and is
based on the expected 30-day post-operative risk of
major bleeding (high-bleed-risk $ 2%, low-to-
moderate-bleed-risk 0%-2%, and minimal-bleed-risk
approximately 0%). 1,25,44,45
/C15 Minimal-bleed-risk procedures and selected surgeries
such as phacoemulsi ﬁcation (cataract) surgery are
those in which anticoagulants may be continued
perioperatively without any or with minimal (ie, day
of procedure only) interruption. 1,46-50
/C15 Low-to-moderate-bleed-risk surgeries/procedures
encompass a broad range of interventions in which
shorter periods of pre-operative anticoagulant inter-
ruption and post-operative anticoagulant resumption
intervals are acceptable due to an overall lower bleed
risk.1
/C15 High-bleed-risk surgeries/procedures are those which
require suf ﬁcient pre-operative anticoagulant inter-
ruption, so there is minimal-to-no residual
anticoagulant effect at the time of the surgery, and
delayed post-operative anticoagulant resumption, to
account for the longer time required for surgical site
hemostasis. Also included in this category are any
surgeries performed with neuraxial (spinal or
epidural) anesthesia or any other neuraxial (eg, pain
management) intervention due to concerns about the
risk for epidural hematoma, a rare but devastating
complication that can result in lower limb
paralysis.51,52
The following qualifying remarks apply to this empiric
risk classi ﬁcation:
/C15 Selected minimal-bleed-risk procedures may require 1
to 2 days of anticoagulant interruption if there is concern
about bleeding: for example, a dental extraction may be
more complex in a patient with poor dentition or
compromised gingival integrity53; a screening colonos-
copy in patients with a history of polyps that may require
resection54; and coronary angiography with a femoral
(instead of radial) artery access.48
/C15 Surgical procedures (eg, an inguinal hernia repair 55)
may vary widely in complexity and might be
justiﬁably categorized as low-to-moderate- or high-
bleed-risk.
TABLE 1 ] Suggested Risk Strati ﬁcation for Patient-speci ﬁc Periprocedural Thromboembolism 13,14,25,a
Risk Category Mechanical Heart Valve Atrial Fibrillation VTE
High ( > 10%/y
risk of ATE or >
10%/mo risk of
VTE)
Mitral valve with major
risk factors for stroke b
Caged ball or tilting-disc
valve in mitral/aortic
position
Recent ( < 3 mo) stroke
or TIA
CHA2DS2VASc score $ 7
or CHADS2 score of 5 or 6
Recent ( < 3 mo) stroke or
TIA
Rheumatic valvular heart
disease
Recent ( < 3 mo and especially 1 mo) VTE
Severe thrombophilia (de ﬁciency of
protein C, protein S or antithrombin;
homozygous factor V Leiden or
prothrombin gene G20210A mutation
or double heterozygous for each
mutation, multiple thrombophilias)
Antiphospholipid antibodies
Active cancer associated with high VTE
riskc
Moderate
(4%-10%/y
risk of ATE or
4%-10%/mo
risk of VTE)
Mitral valve without major
risk factors for stroke b
Bileaﬂet AVR with major
risk factors for stroke b
CHA2DS2VASc score of 5 or 6
or CHADS2 score of 3 or 4
VTE within past 3-12 mo
Recurrent VTE
Non-severe thrombophilia (heterozygous
factor V Leiden or prothrombin gene
G20210A mutation)
Active cancer or recent history of cancer
Low ( < 4%/y risk
of ATE or
< 2%/mo risk
of VTE)
Bileaﬂet AVR without
major risk factors for
strokeb
CHA2DS2VASc score of 1-4
or CHADS 2 score of 0-2
(and no prior stroke or
TIA)
VTE > 12 mo ago
ATE, arterial thromboembolism; TIA, transient ischemic attack; CHADS 2 ¼ congestive heart failure, hypertension, age $ 75 years, diabetes mellitus, prior
stroke or transient ischemic attack; CHA 2DS2VASc ¼ congestive heart failure, hypertension, age $ 75 years, diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient
ischemic attack, vascular disease history, age $ 65 years, female sex. Adapted with permission from Douketis et al. 14
aEmpiric risk strati ﬁcation that is a starting point for assessing perioperative thromboembolism risk; should be combined with clinical judgment that
incorporates individual patient- and surgery/procedure-related factors.
bIncludes: AF, prior stroke/TIA during anticoagulant interruption or other prior stroke/TIA, prior valve thrombosis, rheumatic heart disease, hyp ertension,
diabetes, congestive heart failure, age $ 75 years.
cIncludes pancreatic cancer, myeloproliferative disorders, primary brain cancer, gastric cancer, and esophageal cancer.
e212 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
/C15 Flexibility with the timing of post-operative DOAC
and LMWH resumption is warranted because a peak
anticoagulant effect occurs within 2 to 4 hours after
administration21; this is especially pertinent if patients
develop greater than expected post-operative
bleeding.
Practical Aspects of Heparin Bridging
The following management points should be considered
when administering heparin bridging:
/C15 Bridging is most often done with an LMWH, typically
with a therapeutic-dose regimen (eg, enoxaparin
1 mg/kg bid, dalteparin 100 IU/kg bid), administered
with the intent of preventing ATE. Bridging with
therapeutic-dose IV UFH is another treatment option;
for example, in patients with severe renal insuf ﬁciency
or who are dialysis-dependent. 14 Other types of hep-
arin bridging may include intermediate-dose regi-
mens (eg, enoxaparin 40 mg bid). 14
/C15 Heparin bridging should be administered in a manner
to minimize the risk for bleeding that would require
re-operation or another intervention (eg, wound
packing). Avoidance of major bleeding is important
because if it occurs, it typically requires a longer
period of anticoagulant interruption that, in turn,
exposes patients to an increased risk for thrombo-
embolism.56 Speciﬁcally, post-operative heparin
bridging should be initiated when there is adequate
TABLE 2 ] Suggested Risk Strati ﬁcation for Procedural Bleed Risk, Based on ISTH Guidance Statements 25
High-bleed-risk surgery/procedure a (30-d risk of
major bleed $ 2%)
Major surgery with extensive tissue injury
Cancer surgery, especially solid tumor resection (lung, esophagus,
gastric, colon, hepatobiliary, pancreatic)
Major orthopedic surgery, including shoulder replacement surgery
Reconstructive plastic surgery
Major thoracic surgery
Urologic or GI surgery, especially anastomosis surgery
Transurethral prostate resection, bladder resection, or tumor ablation
Nephrectomy, kidney biopsy
Colonic polyp resection
Bowel resection
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy placement, endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Surgery in highly vascular organs (kidneys, liver, spleen)
Cardiac, intracranial, or spinal surgery
Any major operation (procedure duration > 45 min)
Neuraxial anesthesia b
Epidural injections
Low-to-moderate-bleed-risk surgery/procedure c
(30-d risk of major bleed 0%-2%)
Arthroscopy
Cutaneous/lymph node biopsies
Foot/hand surgery
Coronary angiography d
GI endoscopy /C6 biopsy
Colonoscopy /C6 biopsy
Abdominal hysterectomy
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
Abdominal hernia repair
Hemorrhoidal surgery
Bronchoscopy /C6 biopsy
Minimal-bleed-risk surgery/procedure e (30-d
risk of major bleed approximately 0%)
Minor dermatologic procedures (excision of basal and squamous cell
skin cancers, actinic keratoses, and premalignant or cancerous skin
nevi)
Ophthalmologic (cataract) procedures
Minor dental procedures (dental extractions, restorations, prosthetics,
endodontics), dental cleanings, ﬁllings
Pacemaker or cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator device implantation
ISTH ¼ International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.
aMinimal to no residual anticoagulant effect at time of procedure (ie, four to ﬁve drug half-life interruptions pre-procedure).
bIncludes spinal and epidural anesthesia or any other neuraxial (eg, pain management) intervention; consider not only absolute risk for major bleedi ng but
potentially devastating consequences of epidural bleeding and associated lower limb paralysis.
cSome residual anticoagulant effect allowed (ie, two to three drug half-life interruptions pre-procedure).
dRadial approach may be considered minimal-bleed-risk compared with femoral approach.
eProcedure can be safely done under full-dose anticoagulation (may consider holding DOAC dose day of procedure to avoid peak anticoagulant effects).
chestjournal.org e213
surgical/procedure-site hemostasis and the patient is
at a relatively low risk for bleeding. Although sub-
jective, this can be determined by assessing the
amount, type (serous, serosanguinous, bloody), and
progress (continuing, increasing, decreasing) of blood
collection in wound bandages or surgical drains.
/C15 The administration of heparin bridging, particularly if
only used pre-operatively, does not preclude the
administration of post-operative low-dose LMWH
(eg, enoxaparin 40 mg daily); for example, in patients
at high risk for bleeding (eg, intracranial or spinal or
CABG surgery) in whom post-operative therapeutic-
dose LMWH bridging might be avoided.
Role of Low-Dose LMWH as VTE Prophylaxis in
Perioperative Management
In patients who require perioperative interruption of a
VKA or a DOAC and are considered at high risk for
post-operative VTE, the need to administer low-dose
LMWH as VTE prophylaxis may be obviated once the
VKA or DOAC is resumed. However, there may be
circumstances when low-dose LMWH can be used in
patients at high VTE risk; for example, those having
abdominopelvic cancer surgery or hip or knee
replacement surgery. 57,58 In such hospitalized patients,
low-dose LMWH would be started, typically, 12 to 24
hours post-operatively and continued for 2 to 3 days
while the VKA takes effect or until resumption of
DOAC therapy. In patients who resume antiplatelet
therapy after a surgery, the addition of low-dose
LMWH can be justi ﬁed in high VTE risk situations
but is empiric and should consider the risk of
bleeding.
Communication and Standardization of
Perioperative Management
Perioperative antithrombotic management typically
involves a team of health-care professionals, comprising
one or more of a surgeon/proceduralist, an internist/
cardiologist/hematologist, an intensivist, a pharmacist,
an anesthesiologist, and a primary care physician, with
multiple transitions of care. Consequently, it is
important to have alignment of the proposed
management plan among the health-care team and that
it is communicated to and agreed upon by the surgeon/
proceduralist, so as to avoid miscommunication that
may lead to adverse outcomes or a delay of the surgery/
procedure.17,59 This can be facilitated with perioperative
antithrombotic clinics, 16,59 which can be administered
in-person or virtually, 60 and with the support of online
tools ( https://thrombosiscanada.ca, http://mappp.ipro.
org, http://www.anticoagulationtoolkit.org/). At an
institutional level, harmonization of perioperative
anticoagulant management care paths that encompass
multiple specialties (eg, surgery, internal medicine,
anesthesia) will facilitate standardization of patient
management.
Standardized management is important because
unstructured usual care varies widely, based on
surveys,61-63 with the potential for confusion among
clinicians and patients as to the planned management. If
anticoagulants are not managed with evidence-based
protocols or guidelines in the perioperative clinical
setting, patients may be exposed to as much as a 0.5% to
1.0% excess risk for disabling stroke (based on a
benchmark risk # 0.5%) and a 3% to 6% excess risk for
serious bleeding (based on a benchmark risk # 1.5%), if
anticoagulant interruption is too short or too long or if
excessive heparin bridging is used. 1,8,64,65
Methodology
Selection of Panel Members and Con ﬂicts of
Interest Disclosure
The guideline panel was selected to comprise a diverse,
multidisciplinary group of clinicians that included
internists, thrombosis specialists, cardiologists,
anesthesiologists, surgeons, intensivists, and
pharmacists, who worked alongside methodologists
from the Mayo Clinic Evidence Center.
The CHEST Guidelines Oversight Committee and
Professional Standards Committee reviewed nominated
panelists according to their quali ﬁcations and con ﬂicts
of interest (COI) before they were approved to join the
panel. Throughout the guideline process, panelists were
required to update and disclose potential ﬁnancial or
intellectual COI according to each PICO question. COI
were reviewed and categorized as disqualifying,
manageable, or approved without management, per
CHEST policy ( https://www.chestnet.org/-/media/
chesnetorg/About ACCP/Documents/
Guidelines_COI_Policy.ashx). Panelists with
manageable COI were required to abstain from voting
on PICO recommendations where such COI were
present but could participate in discussions, provided
they refrained from strong advocacy. A complete list of
the panelists ’ COI and their management is shown in
e-Appendix 1 .
e214 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
Selection of PICO Questions
The PICO questions that anchor these guidelines were
based on those used with the last guideline iteration,
supplemented by new PICOs p roposed by the guideline
panel. All panelists voted on whether each PICO
should be included in the guideline. For all PICOs,
standardized questions were developed using the
population-intervention -comparator-outcome
format. A listing of all PICO questions is provided in
e-Appendix 2 .
Data Sources
Multiple databases were searched using text words and
controlled vocabulary as outlined in e-Appendix 2 .
This search was done in two parts: the ﬁrst was the
systematic review of the literature from 1970 to
December 2011, used by the 9th Edition of the CHEST
Perioperative Antithrombotic Therapy Practice
Guidelines; the second was an update of this search
strategy to include studies up until end-July 2021.
Searches were limited to English-language articles and
human subject studies, and by article type (clinical
trial, randomized clinical trial, systematic review). The
literature search was supplemented by conducting
Internet-based searches of relevant studies identi ﬁed in
ClinicalTrials.gov, meeting abstracts and conference
proceedings, asking content experts, and reference lists
of studies that satis ﬁed inclusion criteria. Indirect
evidence was sought for questions that were not
supported by direct evidence. Panel members
collaborated with the systematic review team to
identify and summarize indirect evidence.
Guideline Framework
The guideline followed the GRADE approach (Grading
of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
Evaluation).66 For each PICO, the certainty of evidence
was rated using GRADE, and an evidence-to-decision
framework was developed using the GRADE evidence-
to-decision criteria. 67 Certainty of evidence was de ﬁned
as the extent to which our con ﬁdence in the effect
estimate was adequate to support a recommendation.
For each PICO, a recommendation was classi ﬁed as a
strong, referred to as “we recommend, ” or conditional,
referred to as “we suggest. ” Overall, evidence synthesis
comprised direct evidence related to the PICO question
and indirect evidence, the later especially when direct
evidence was limited. In addition, factors that included
the costs of the interventions and the avoidance of harm
were also considered.
Evidence Synthesis
Outcomes from randomized trials and observational
studies were expressed as a relative risk (RR) and
associated 95% CI. Meta-analysis was conducted when
feasible. For non-comparative studies, an overall
proportion was determined using the Freeman-Tukey
arcsine transformation method. All analyses were done
using Open Meta-Analyst. Certainty of evidence was
categorized as high, moderate, low, or very low,
reﬂecting the strengths and limitations of evidence that
were based on the study design, risk of bias, imprecision,
inconsistency, indirectness of results, and likelihood of
publication bias. Risk of bias in randomized trials was
based on the Cochrane Collaboration ’s Risk of Bias 2
tool,68 which considers the randomization process,
deviations from intended interventions, missing
outcome data, outcome measurement, reported result
selection, and other sources of bias. Risk of bias in
observational studies was based on the Newcastle-
Ottawa Scale, which considers the representativeness of
the exposed cohort, selection of the nonexposed cohort,
ascertainment of exposure and outcomes, comparability
of cohorts, and adequacy of follow-up. Precision was
judged based on whether CIs crossed the null as a target
of certainty. If there were few events ( < 10), we
considered rating down by two to three levels unless the
sample size was large ( > 2,000-4,000). An arbitrary RR
reduction threshold of 25% was used as a cutoff for
lowering certainty in precision by two levels. Sample
Evidence Tables that formed the basis of
recommendations are shown in e-Appendix 3 .
Development of Recommendations
We used a modi ﬁed Delphi technique to achieve
consensus on guideline statements. 18,69 This method
minimizes bias related to group interactions and enables
anonymity among panelists. Panelists without a primary
COI voted on approving PICO-speci ﬁc guideline
statements using a standardized online survey tool
(SurveyMonkey, Momentive Inc.). Each panelist could
also suggest edits to the guideline statement wording and
could suggest additional qualifying remarks or
comments as to the implementation of the guideline in
clinical practice. To achieve consensus and for inclusion
in the ﬁnal guideline, each guidance statement required
at least 80% agreement among at least 75% of eligible
panel members (without primary COI).
For the 43 PICO questions and 44 associated
recommendations (two recommendations for PICO 29),
39 recommendations achieved consensus in the ﬁrst
chestjournal.org e215
voting round, with the remainder achieving consensus
in the second voting round. There were ﬁve guideline
statements (2, 6, 20, 28, and 34) in which one panel
member disagreed with either the strength or direction
of the recommendation, and one guideline statement
(29a) in which one panel member disagreed with both
the strength and direction of the recommendation.
Patients Who Are Receiving a VKA and
Require an Elective Surgery or Procedure
Background: The timing of VKA interruption before a
surgery/procedure, decided upon with the intent of
achieving a normal or near-normal INR at the time of a
surgery/procedure, is based on the elimination half-life
of VKAs that are typically observed in patients without
major comorbidities (eg, impaired liver function),
genetic polymorphisms, or drug-drug interactions that
might affect VKA metabolism: 36 to 42 hours for
warfarin, 8 to 11 hours for acenocoumarol, and 96 to
104 hours for phenprocoumon. 70-73 For patients in
whom the intent is to normalize the INR after
interruption of warfarin, 5 days of interruption prior to
the day of the surgery/procedure is needed for the
anticoagulant effect to be eliminated or near-eliminated;
6 or more days of interruption may be needed in
selected patients, such as elderly patients or in patients
with genetic polymorphisms that may delay warfarin
metabolism,74,75 and in those with an elevated INR (ie,
> 3.5) when assessed. The resumption of a VKA after a
surgery/procedure implies that attainment of an
anticoagulant effect is delayed after the initial two to
three doses are given and that a full anticoagulant effect
(INR > 2.0) will occur 4 to 8 days after VKA
resumption.76 Given these considerations, routinely
measuring the INR in the immediate pre-operative (day
before) and post-operative (1-2 days after) period during
a surgery/procedure would not be needed. There may be
circumstances, however, when such testing may be
warranted; for example, in patients with a pre-operative
high (ie, > 3.5) INR, in patients who are known to have
delayed warfarin elimination, or if after post-operative
VKA resumption there is unexpected bleeding.
For patients who require perioperative VKA interruption,
the premise of heparin bridging has been to shorten the
period before and after a surgery/procedure when patients
are not therapeutically anticoagulated, with the aim of
mitigating the risk for perioperative ATE primarily, as
well as recurrent VTE. However, this premise can be
questioned given the multiplicity of factors that can lead
to perioperative thromboembolism, 41,77 including the
surgery/procedure itself,43 and the limited capacity of
heparin bridging to affect these factors and associated
pathophysiological pathways.
Perioperative Interruption and Resumption of VKAs
PICO 1 : In patients requiring VKA interruption,
should VKA be interrupted $ 5 days vs < 5 days before
an elective surgery/procedure?
Evidence. No randomized trials compared a 5-day and
a < 5-day preoperative interruption of warfarin, and no
study has compared the effect of a 5-day and > 5-day
interruption on perioperative bleeding outcomes, relying
instead on a surrogate outcome (ie, INR) at the time of
surgery to determine the appropriateness of VKA
interruption. In the non-perioperative setting, indirect
evidence supports a 5-day warfarin interruption period to
attain a normal or near-normal INR. 78 In a prospective
cohort study of 224 patients in whom warfarin was
stopped 5 days before a surgery/procedure and had INR
testing the day before surgery, 15 (7%) patients had an
INR > 1.5.56 In a randomized trial that compared a 5-day
or 1-day pre-operative interruption of warfarin (with the
1-day group receiving 1 mg oral vitamin K the day before
surgery), the mean INR was 1.2 at surgery in the 5-day
interruption group.79 A subanalysis of a randomized trial
of DOAC vs warfarin therapy for atrial ﬁbrillation that
assessed perioperative management found that longer
vs shorter ( $ 3 days vs < 3 days) warfarin interruption
conferred a decrease risk for major bleeding (RR ¼ 0.29;
95% CI: 0.15-0.55) without affecting ATE risk (RR ¼
0.49; 95% CI: 0.19-1.3). 80 Other observational studies
support a longer ( $ 5-day) interruption interval, 81,82
as do uncontrolled studies of perioperative warfarin
management in which $ 5-day interruption was
associated with low rates of major bleeding
(approximately 2%) and ATE ( < 0.5%).8,10,56,83-94
1. In patients requiring VKA (warfarin) interruption
for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
VKAs (warfarin) ‡ 5 days over an interruption of <
5 days before an elective surgery/procedure
(Conditional Recommendation, Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations :
/C15 Providing a perioperative VKA management calendar
that is distributed by paper or electronically to pa-
tients and clinicians has the potential to minimize
VKA dosing errors and optimize communication.
e216 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
/C15 In selected patients, especially the elderly with comor-
bidities, patients with very low dose warfarin re-
quirements, and those with a higher target INR range, a
longer period of warfarin interruption may be needed.
/C15 The interruption timing for non-warfarin VKAs will
differ, as it is shorter for acenocoumarol (2-3 days)
and longer for phenprocoumon (10-12 days).
PICO 2 : In patients who interrupted warfarin before
an elective surgery/procedure, should warfarin be
resumed 12 to 24 hours after surgery (evening of, or
next day) and when there is adequate hemostasis
vs resuming warfarin further from the surgery/
procedure?
Evidence. There are no studies comparing early (12-24
hours) with delayed ( > 24 hours) postoperative warfarin
resumption. In uncontrolled observational studies,
resuming warfarin within 24 hours after a surgery/
procedure was associated with rates of major bleeding
and ATE of 2.7% (95% CI: 1.6-3.9) and 0.1% (95% CI:
0.1-1.8),56,83,87,90,91,95 whereas those that assessed
delayed warfarin resumption reported rates of bleeding
and ATE of 8.6% (95% CI: 0-17.7) and 2.4% (95% CI: 0-
7.0), respectively. 88,89,96
2. In patients requiring VKA (warfarin) interruption
for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest
resuming VKA (warfarin) within 24 hours over a
delay to > 24 hours after an elective surgery/procedure
(Conditional Recommendation, Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 For most patients, resuming VKAs within 24 hours
implies resumption on the evening of the surgery/
procedure.
/C15 Implicit in the early (within 24 hours) resumption of a
VKA is that it takes, typically, 2 to 3 days for a partial
anticoagulant effect and 4 to 8 days for a full anti-
coagulant effect to occur.
/C15 VKA resumption may be delayed in certain post-
operative circumstances, such as inadequate surgery/
procedure-site hemostasis, an anticipated need for
additional intervention, or patient inability to take
oral medications.
PICO 3: In patients who interrupted warfarin before a
surgery/procedure, should warfarin be resumed at
double the usual maintenance dose for 1 to 2 days
vs resuming warfarin with the usual maintenance dose?
Evidence. One randomized trial of 98 patients
compared post-operative resumption of warfarin at
patients’ usual dose vs doubling the warfarin dose for
the ﬁrst 2 post-operative days. 97 By the ﬁfth post-
operative day, an INR $ 2.0 was attained in 13% of
the usual-dose group and 50% of the doubling dose
group (RR ¼ 0.27; 95% CI: 0.10 to 0.60); by the tenth
post-operative day, this occurred in 68% and 87% of
these groups (RR ¼ 0.87; 95% CI: 0.65 to 1.00). In a
40-patient randomized trial that compared doubling
vs usual-dose post-operative warfarin resumption, the
median number of days to reach an INR $ 2.0 was
not signi ﬁcantly different in the two groups (7.8
vs 9.0 days; 95% CI: –3.1 to 4.9). 98 In observational
studies that used post-operative VKA resumption with
a double-dose or usual-dose regimen, the mean
duration to attain an INR $ 2.0 was 4.6 and 5.1 days,
respectively.56,95
3. In patients requiring VKA (warfarin) interruption
for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest
resuming the ﬁrst post-operative VKA dose at the
patient’s usual dose over resuming VKA with double
the usual dose (Conditional Recommendation, Very
Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Although post-operative doubling of the warfarin
dose for 1 to 2 days may lead to a more rapid
attainment of an INR $ 2.0 in some patients, there
are concerns in applying this approach in practice; for
example, in patients with variable warfarin dose reg-
imens and those expected to be hospitalized for >
1 day.
PICO 4: In patients who interrupted warfarin before a
surgery/procedure and have an elevated INR (ie, > 1.5)
1 to 2 days before surgery/procedure, should vitamin K
be administered vs not giving vitamin K?
Evidence. Among patients who have interrupted VKAs 5
to 6 days before a surgery/procedure, the practice of pre-
operative INR measurement, typically on the day before
or day of the surgery/procedure, may be done in selected
patients; however, few studies have addressed the role of
vitamin K in this clinical setting. In an uncontrolled
observational study of 43 VKA-treated patients who had
an INR of 1.4 to 1.9 on the day before elective surgery
and received 1 mg oral vitamin K, the INR was
normalized ( # 1.3) in 76.6% of patients on the day of
chestjournal.org e217
surgery.99 In another observational study of 82 VKA-
treated patients who received 1 mg IV vitamin K, on
average, 27 hours pre-operatively, a normalized INR for
surgery was achieved in 54.9% of patients. 100 Other
studies that have assessed vitamin K to normalize an
elevated INR have been done in other clinical situations
(eg, bleeding, urgent surgery) outside of the elective
perioperative setting. 101-104
4. In patients requiring VKA interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure who have an elevated INR
(ie, > 1.5) 1 to 2 days before the surgery/procedure, we
suggest against routine use of pre-operative vitamin K
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Uncertainty about routine pre-operative vitamin K
administration relates to the dose of vitamin K,
limited availability of oral vitamin K formulations,
and potential for resistance to post-operative re-
anticoagulation.
Bridging Anticoagulation During Interruption of
VKA Therapy
PICO 5: In patients with a mechanical prosthetic heart
valve, should bridging anticoagulation during
interruption of warfarin therapy be administered vs no
bridging?
Evidence . One randomized trial assessed the need for
heparin bridging in patients with a mechanical
prosthetic heart valve. In the PERIOP-2 trial
involving warfarin-treated patients who required an
elective surgery/procedure, 20.7% (304 of 1,471) of
patients had a mechanic al heart valve, of whom
9.0% had a mitral valve and 11.7% had an aortic
valve prosthesis. 105 All patients received pre-
operative bridging with o pen-label dalteparin, 200
IU/kg daily (100 IU/kg daily on the day before the
surgery/procedure). Pos t-operatively, patients
received dalteparin 200 IU/kg daily ( ﬁxed-dose 5,000
I Ud a i l yi np a t i e n t sa th i g h -bleed-risk) or placebo, in
a double-blind manner, until the INR was $ 2.0;
patient follow-up was for 12 weeks. In patients
with a mechanical heart valve, there was no
signiﬁcant difference in the no bridging and bridging
groups for the outcomes of major thromboembolism
(0% vs 0.67%; P ¼ .67) and major bleeding
(1.96% vs 0.67%; P ¼ . 6 2 ) .I na no b s e r v a t i o n a ls t u d y
assessing bridging vs no bridging management in
VKA-treated patients which included patients with a
mechanical heart valve, those who received
perioperative bridging had an increased risk for
major bleeding (3.6% vs 1.2%; P ¼ .0007). 106 In a
meta-analysis of non-randomized studies totaling
12,278 patients that compared bridging vs no
bridging in a mixed population of patients, of whom
24% had a mechanical heart valve, there was no
signi ﬁcant difference in the risk of ATE in bridged
and non-bridged groups (OR ¼ 0.80; 95% CI: 0.42-
1.54), but bridging conferred an increased risk of
major bleeding (OR ¼ 3.60; 95% CI: 1.52-8.50). 23 In
non-randomized studies in which all patients with a
mechanical heart valve received perioperative
therapeutic-dose heparin bridging, this approach was
associated with a pooled incidence of ATE and major
bleeding of 0.9% (95% CI: 0.2-1.5) and 2.8% (0.8-
4.8), respectively. 56,86-88 ,107-109
5. In patients receiving VKA therapy for a mechanical
heart valve who require VKA interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against heparin
bridging (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 In selected patients considered at high risk for
thromboembolism ( Table 1 ), as examples, those with
(1) an older-generation mechanical heart valve [ie,
tilting-disc valve]; (2) a mechanical mitral valve with
one or more risk factors for stroke; (3) a recent
(< 3 months) thromboembolic event; or (4) other
high-risk patients (eg, prior perioperative stroke), pre-
and post-operative heparin bridging is suggested (see
Guideline Statement 8).
PICO 6 : In patients with atrial ﬁbrillation, should
bridging anticoagulation be administered during
interruption of VKA therapy vs no bridging?
Evidence. The BRIDGE trial assessed a heparin bridging
vs no bridging strategy in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation
who required warfarin interruption for an elective
surgery/procedure.76 In a double-blind manner,
patients received bridging with therapeutic-dose
LMWH (dalteparin 100 IU/kg bid) for 3 days pre-
operatively, with only the morning dose given on the
day before surgery/procedure, and for at least 5 days
post-operatively until the INR was $ 2.0. Patient
follow-up was for 4 weeks post-operatively. This trial
showed that no bridging was noninferior to LMWH
e218 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
bridging for the outcome of ATE (0.3% vs 0.4%; OR ¼
0.80; 95% CI: 0.42-1.54), but bridging conferred a
threefold increased risk for major bleeding
(3.2% vs 1.3%; OR ¼ 3.60; 95% CI: 1.52-8.50). In the
PERIOP-2 trial, there was no signi ﬁcant difference
between the bridging (n ¼ 670) and no bridging (n ¼
497) arms in the atrial ﬁbrillation subgroup for the
outcomes of major thromboembolism (0.75% vs 1.41%)
and major bleeding (1.64% vs 2.62%). 105 In a
subanalysis of a randomized trial of DOAC vs VKA
therapy for atrial ﬁbrillation that assessed perioperative
management in 1,415 VKA-treated patients, those who
received heparin bridging compared with those not
bridged were at increased risk for major bleeding
(6.8% vs 1.6%; OR ¼ 4.4; 95% CI: 2.4-8.1). 110 In an
observational study of 2,200 patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation who required perioperative VKA
interruption, a multivariate analysis found that,
compared with no bridging, heparin bridging was
associated with higher rates of clinically important
bleeding (5.0% vs 1.3%; OR ¼ 3.84; 95% CI: 2.07-7.14)
and cardiovascular events (4.6% vs 2.5%; OR ¼ 1.62;
95% CI: 0.95-2.78). 106 The aforementioned meta-
analysis found no signi ﬁcant difference in ATE but an
increased risk of bleeding for bridging vs no bridging in
a mixed population of patients, of whom 44% had atrial
ﬁbrillation.23
6. In patients receiving VKA therapy for atrial
ﬁbrillation who require VKA interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we recommend against
heparin bridging (Strong Recommendation, Moderate
Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 In selected patients considered at high risk for
thromboembolism ( Table 1 ), as examples (1) those
with a recent [ < 3 month] history of stroke or tran-
sient ischemic attack; (2) other high-risk patients (eg,
prior perioperative stroke), or (3) with a CHA 2DS2-
VASc score $ 7 or CHADS 2 score of 5 or 6), pre- and
post-operative heparin bridging is suggested (see
Guideline Statement 8).
/C15 A perioperative VKA and heparin bridging calendar
(paper or electronic) that provides patients and
clinicians an easy-to-use timetable for VKA inter-
ruption and resumption alongside the heparin
bridging dosing regimen has the potential to
minimize errors and optimize communication
among caregivers.
PICO 7 : In patients with VTE, should bridging
anticoagulation be administered during interruption of
VKA therapy vs no bridging?
Evidence. In patients with a history of VTE, bridging
anticoagulation has been used during VKA interruption
for patients requiring an elective surgery/procedure, 111
but there are no randomized trials to address its ef ﬁcacy
and safety. In an observational study of 755 patients that
assessed a bridging (n ¼ 214) vs no bridging (n ¼ 514)
approach in VKA-treated patients with VTE who
required a surgery/procedure, there was no signi ﬁcant
difference in recurrent VTE or bleeding outcomes in the
two groups. 112 Other observational studies found that
heparin bridging increased the risk for major bleeding
with bridging, 113,114 with no signi ﬁcant reduction in
recurrent VTE. 113,115,116 In a systematic review totaling
6,195 VKA-treated patients with VTE who required
elective surgery, a heparin bridging vs no bridging
approach was associated with a higher incidence of any
bleeding (3.9% [95% CI: 2.0-7.4] vs 0.4% [95% CI: 0.1-
1.7]) and no effect on recurrent VTE (0.7% [95% CI: 0.4-
1.2] vs 0.5% [95% CI: 0.3-0.8]). 117
7. In patients receiving VKA therapy for VTE as the
sole clinical indication who require VKA interruption
for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against
heparin bridging (Conditional Recommendation, Very
Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations :
/C15 Suggesting against bridging with a therapeutic-dose
heparin regimen does not preclude the use of a low-
dose heparin regimen, typically started within 24
hours after surgery and continued for up to 5 days
while VKA therapy is resumed, to decrease the risk
for post-operative VTE.
/C15 In selected patients considered at high risk for VTE
(Table 1), as examples (1) those with a recent
(< 3 months) history of VTE, 36,118 or (2) severe
thrombophilia, or (3) selected types of active cancer,
pre- and post-operative heparin bridging is suggested
(see Guideline Statement 8).
PICO 8: In VKA-treated patients who are considered at
high risk for thromboembolism ( Table 1 ), should
bridging anticoagulation be given during interruption
of VKA therapy vs no bridging?
PICO 9: In VKA-treated patients who are considered at
low-to-moderate-risk for thromboembolism ( Table 1 ),
chestjournal.org e219
should bridging anticoagulation be given during
interruption of VKA therapy vs no bridging?
Evidence. Most studies assessing a bridging vs no
bridging perioperative management strategy did not
separate patients according to thromboembolic risk;
consequently, evidence to inform these related PICOs is
derived from studies referred to in the section entitled
“Bridging Anticoagulation During Interruption of VKA
Therapy,” supplemented by uncontrolled observational
studies84,119,120 and meta-analyses23,121,122 that separated
patients and associated management according to
thromboembolic risk.
8. In patients receiving VKA therapy who are
classiﬁed as high risk for thromboembolism and who
require VKA interruption for an elective surgery/
procedure, we suggest heparin bridging over no
heparin bridging (Conditional Recommendation, Very
Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Stratiﬁcation of patients according to perioperative
thromboembolic risk, as shown in Table 1 , is empiric
as there are no clinical prediction models that have
been validated in this clinical setting. Accordingly, a
patient’s individual risk pro ﬁle may inform decisions
about heparin bridging. The type of surgery may also
affect thromboembolic risk; for example, an antici-
pated higher risk in patients having open cardiac or
major vascular surgery.
9. In patients receiving VKA therapy who are classi ﬁed
as low-to-moderate-risk for thromboembolism and
who require VKA interruption for an elective surgery/
procedure, we suggest against heparin bridging
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Although patients may be classi ﬁed empirically as
low-to-moderate-risk for thromboembolism, there
may be selected patients within this classi ﬁcation
grouping (Table 1) in whom heparin bridging may be
considered.
Management of Patients Who Are Receiving a VKA
and Need Minor Procedures
Dental Procedures: Minor dental procedures include
single and multiple tooth extractions, and endodontic
(root canal) procedures.
PICO 10 : In patients who are having minor dental
procedures and are receiving a VKA, should VKAs be
continued vs stopped 5 to 6 days before the procedure?
PICO 11 : In patients who are having minor dental
procedures and are receiving a VKA, should VKAs be
continued with a pro-hemostatic agent vs an
alternative approach (interrupting VKA with or
without heparin bridging or continuing VKA without
pro-hemostatic agent or co-administering different pro-
hemostatic agents)?
Evidence. Multiple randomized trials and prospective
cohort studies have evaluated perioperative
anticoagulant management for dental procedures.
Management strategies that have been assessed include:
continuing VKAs, with or without co-administered pro-
hemostatic interventions that comprise anti ﬁbrinolytic
drugs (eg, tranexamic acid) or local measures (eg, ﬁbrin
glue, topical hemostatic agents and sealants, sutures);
partial (2-3 days ’pre-procedure) VKA interruption; and
complete (5 days ’ pre-procedure) VKA interruption. 14
These studies had limitations, with one or more of the
following: small ( < 100 patients) study samples; variable
deﬁnitions of bleeding and other outcomes; and
uncertain outcome capture during follow-up. 123-148
Among four randomized trials comparing VKA
continuation vs interruption, none showed a signi ﬁcant
increase in bleeding with VKA continuation. 123,128,129,131
One meta-analysis (of two studies) comparing
continuing vs interrupting VKAs found no signi ﬁcant
increased intra-procedural bleeding (RR ¼ 1.67; 95% CI:
0.97-2.89) or post-procedural bleeding (RR ¼ 1.44,
95% CI: 0.71-2.92) with VKA continuation. 149 Taken
together, these studies suggest that continuing VKAs is
associated with a low (approximately 5%) risk for any
bleeding, with such bleeding considered self-limiting.
Another approach associated with a low risk for
bleeding is partial interruption of the VKA for 2 to
3 days before the dental procedure. In terms of
thromboembolic outcomes, these appeared rare
(< 0.1%), although it was uncertain if these outcomes
were reliably identi ﬁed during follow-up. If tranexamic
acid is used, 10 mL of a 5% mouthwash solution can be
given just before the procedure and two to three times
daily for 1 to 2 days ’ post-procedure.123,150
10. In patients receiving VKA therapy who need a
dental procedure, we suggest continuation of VKA
over VKA interruption (Conditional Recommendation,
Low Certainty of Evidence).
e220 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The risk for dental procedure-related bleeding may
vary, being lower with single tooth extractions and
higher with multiple tooth extractions or in patients
with poor gingival health; accordingly, VKA inter-
ruption may be preferred in situations where oral
bleeding is expected to be considerable.
11. In patients receiving VKA therapy who need a
dental procedure, we suggest using a pro-hemostatic
agent with continuation of VKA over alternative
management options (eg, discontinuation of VKA
with or without heparin bridging) (Conditional
Recommendation, Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Pro-hemostatic options include pre- and post-
procedure administration of oral tranexamic acid
mouthwash, two to three times daily, and
intervention-speciﬁc measures (eg, extra sutures,
gauze soaked in tranexamic acid).
Minor Dermatologic Procedures: Minor skin
procedures include excision of basal and squamous cell
skin cancers, actinic keratoses, and premalignant or
cancerous skin nevi.
PICO 12 : In patients who are having a minor
dermatologic procedure and are receiving a VKA,
should VKA be continued around the time of the
procedure vs stopping the VKA 5 to 6 days before the
procedure?
Evidence. No randomized trials have assessed
perioperative anticoagulant management. Prospective,
controlled cohort studies reported a higher incidence of
bleeding in patients who continued VKAs compared
with patients with VKA interruption, with most bleeds
being self-limiting.151-154 The incidence of bleeding with
the continuation of VKAs appears to be low ( < 5%),
although there was uncertainty as to the reliability that
events were identi ﬁed.
12. In patients receiving VKA therapy who require a
minor dermatologic procedure, we suggest
continuation of VKA over VKA interruption
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The risk for dermatologic procedure-related bleeding
may vary, being lower with resections of small (1-
2 cm) skin cancers and biopsies, and higher with
resections of larger ( > 3 cm) skin cancers, particularly
if skin grafting is required; accordingly, VKA inter-
ruption may be preferred in situations where site-
related bleeding is expected to be considerable or if
lengthy wound healing is expected (eg, skin graft).
Minor Ophthalmologic Procedures: Minor
ophthalmologic procedures include cataract surgery
(phacoemulsiﬁcation), which is a largely avascular
procedure, and surgery for glaucoma (iridotomy) and
diabetic retinopathy (panretinal photocoagulation,
vitrectomy). Whereas most eye surgery is done using
sub-Tenon’s or topical anesthesia or a peribulbar
(extraconal) block technique, retrobulbar (intraconal)
anesthesia poses a concern in anticoagulated patients
due to the potential complication of retrobulbar
hematoma,155 which can lead to loss of vision.
PICO 13 : In patients who are having a minor
ophthalmologic procedure and are receiving a VKA,
should VKA be continued around the time of the
procedure vs stopping the VKA 5 to 6 days before the
procedure?
Evidence. No randomized trials have assessed
perioperative management with cataract surgery. 156 In
prospective cohort studies, the incidence of major and
non-major bleeding was < 3%.157-166 In a meta-analysis
of observational studies, patients who continued VKAs
around cataract surgery had an increased risk for
bleeding (OR ¼ 3.26; 95% CI: 1.73-6.16), with an overall
incidence of bleeding of 10% (95% CI: 5-19). 46 However,
almost all bleeds were self- limiting, consisting of dot
hyphemas or subconjunctival bleeds, and no patient had
compromised visual acuity related to bleeding.
13. In patients receiving VKA therapy who require a
minor ophthalmologic procedure, we suggest
continuation of VKA over VKA interruption
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 VKA interruption may be preferred in patients
considered at higher risk for bleeding; for example,
those having more complex retinal surgery or patients
having surgery with retrobulbar anesthesia. Cataract
surgery is done usually with topical anesthesia and,
less commonly, with retrobulbar anesthesia.
Cardiac Device Procedures: Commonly performed
cardiac device procedures include implantation of a
permanent cardiac pacemaker or an ICD.
chestjournal.org e221
PICO 14 : In patients who are having a cardiac device
procedure and are receiving a VKA, should VKA be
continued around the time of the procedure vs stopping
the VKA 5 to 6 days before the procedure?
Evidence. The BRUISE CONTROL trial assessed a
warfarin interruption-bridging vs warfarin
continuation-no bridging strategy in patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation or a mechanical heart valve who required
implantation of a pacemaker or ICD. 167 In the warfarin
interruption-bridging group, patients received
therapeutic-dose LMWH (89% of patients) or IV UFH
(11% of patients) pre-procedure for 3 days. Post-
procedure, bridging was resumed within 24 hours. The
primary outcome of clinically signi ﬁcant pocket
hematoma occurred in 3.5% (12 of 343) of patients in
the warfarin continuation group, and in 16.0% (54 of
338) of patients in the warfarin interruption-bridging
group (RR ¼ 0.19; 95% CI: 0.10-0.36). Meta-analyses of
observational studies where VKAs were continued
around the time of pacemaker/ICD implantation
demonstrated similar low (approximately 2% to 6%)
rates of pacemaker pocket hematomas. 50,168,169 Smaller
randomized trials also reported higher bleeding with
VKA interruption and bridging compared with VKA
continuation around pacemaker implantation, 170-172
whereas a 467-patient retrospective cohort study
reported a 1.6% incidence of major pocket hematomas
in patients who did not interrupt warfarin for
pacemaker implantation. 173
14. In patients receiving VKA therapy who require a
pacemaker or ICD implantation, we recommend
continuation of VKA over VKA interruption and
heparin bridging (Strong Recommendation, Moderate
Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Continuation of VKAs around cardiac device pro-
cedures is based on the premise that the patient ’s INR
at the time of the procedure is < 3.0.
PICO 15 : In patients receiving VKA therapy who
require VKA interruption for a colonoscopy with
anticipated polypectomy, should heparin bridging be
given vs no heparin bridging?
Evidence. The management of patients undergoing
polypectomy poses speci ﬁc challenges because of the
potential for post-procedure bleeding, which can be
delayed when the scar formed over the polyp stalk is
dislodged with potential exposure of friable, vascular
tissue.54 One randomized trial compared continuing
VKAs with cold snare polypectomy vs VKA interruption
and heparin bridging with hot snare polypectomy in 184
patients who needed colonic polyp resection. 174 The
incidence of polypectomy-related major bleeding was
higher in the VKA interruption-heparin bridging group
than in the VKA continuation group (12.0% [95% CI:
5.0-19.1] vs 4.7% [95% CI: 0.2-9.2]); this difference was
not statistically signi ﬁcant.
15. In patients receiving VKA therapy who require
VKA interruption for a colonoscopy with anticipated
polypectomy, we suggest against heparin bridging
during the period of VKA interruption (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Perioperative Management of Patients Who
Are Receiving Heparin Bridging
Background: The perioperative management of patients
who receive heparin bridging is informed by an
understanding of the basic pharmacologic properties of
bridging agents, LMWH and UFH. 22 LMWHs have an
elimination half-life of 3 to 5 hours, which informs pre-
operative interruption timing, and a peak action
occurring 3 to 4 hours after administration, which
informs post-operative initiation timing. 22 UFH has a
dose-dependent elimination half-life that is
approximately 90 minutes but can vary from 30 to 120
minutes depending on the level of anticoagulation (as
reﬂected by the aPTT or anti-factor Xa levels) at the time
of interruption. 22
Perioperative Use of IV UFH as Bridging
Anticoagulation
PICO 16 : In patients who are receiving bridging
anticoagulation with therapeutic-dose IV UFH, should
UFH be stopped 4 to 6 hours before surgery vs stopping
UFH closer to surgery?
PICO 17 : In patients who are receiving bridging
anticoagulation with therapeutic-dose IV UFH, should
UFH be resumed > 24 hours after a surgery/procedure
vs within 24 hours after a surgery/procedure?
Evidence. There are no studies assessing the timing of IV
UFH interruption and resumption around the time of a
surgery/procedure. Based on the elimination half-life, an
infusion of UFH can be stopped 4 to 6 hours before
surgery to eliminate any residual anticoagulant effect. 22
Resumption of IV UFH after surgery follows the
approach used for LMWH in terms of the timing of
post-operative resumption, and with IV UFH resumed
e222 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
at the same or lower infusion rate as that used pre-
operatively.175,176
16. In patients receiving therapeutic-dose IV UFH
bridging for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest
stopping UFH ‡ 4 hours before a surgery/procedure
over stopping IV UFH < 4 hours before a surgery/
procedure (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
17. In patients receiving therapeutic-dose IV UFH
bridging for an elective surgery/procedure, we suggest
resuming UFH ‡ 24 hours after a surgery/procedure
over resuming UFH within 24 hours after a surgery/
procedure (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 When resuming UFH post-operatively, we suggest
avoiding a bolus dose and commencing with a lower-
intensity infusion that is associated with a lower target
aPTT than that used for initiation of full-dose UFH
administration.
Perioperative Use of LMWH as Bridging
Anticoagulation
PICO 18 : In patients who are receiving LWMH
bridging, should the last pre-operative dose of LMWH
be given 24 hours before surgery vs 12 hours before
surgery?
Evidence. There are no studies assessing the timing of
LMWH bridging interruption before a surgery/
procedure and its effect on bleeding or other clinical
outcomes. In observational studies assessing LMWH
bridging, there were no apparent higher bleeding rates
(compared with non-bridged controls from other
studies) if the last dose of LMWH was given
approximately 12 hours (evening) before surgery or
approximately 24 hours before a surgery/procedure. 56,95
In studies assessing a surrogate marker for bleeding
(anti-factor Xa levels), > 90% of patients who received
their last LMWH dose approximately 12 hours before a
surgery/procedure had a detectable anticoagulant effect
at surgery, with 34% of patients having an elevated
(therapeutic level) anticoagulant effect (ie, anti-factor Xa
level $ 0.50 IU/mL) at the time of surgery. 177,178
18. In patients receiving LMWH bridging for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest administering
the last pre-operative LMWH bridging dose at
approximately 24 hours over administering the last
dose 10 to 12 hours before a surgery/procedure
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
PICO 19 : In patients who are receiving bridging with
therapeutic-dose LMWH and are having high-bleed-
risk surgery, should therapeutic-dose LMWH be
resumed within 24 hours after surgery vs resuming
LMWH > 24 hours after surgery ?
Evidence. No randomized trials have compared an early
(within 24 hours) or delayed ( > 24 hours) resumption of
therapeutic-dose LMWH after a surgery/procedure,
irrespective of the type of surgery. The BRIDGE trial
used a standardized post-operative heparin resumption
regimen where LMWH was resumed 24 hours after a
low-to-moderate-bleed-risk surgery/procedure and 48 to
72 hours after a high-bleed-risk surgery/procedure was
associated with a 3.2% incidence of major bleeding. 76 In
a subanalysis of the RE-LY trial, which compared
warfarin and dabigatran for stroke prevention in atrial
ﬁbrillation, patients who were receiving (open-label)
warfarin and received perioperative LMWH bridging
without a standardized bridging regimen had a
6.8% incidence of major bleeding. 110 In an observational
study in which all patients received LMWH bridging
with enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg daily, started 12 to 24 hours
after all types of surgery, patients who had major ( > 1
hour duration) surgery had a 20% (8 of 40) incidence of
major bleeding, whereas major bleeding occurred in
0.7% (1 of 148) of patients who had a minor ( < 1 hour
duration) surgery or procedure. 179 Other observational
studies that allowed a ﬂexible post-operative bridging
regimen in high-bleed-risk patients, with either delayed
resumption of therapeutic-dose LMWH or substitution
of a low-dose regimen, found a low ( < 5%) incidence of
major bleeding. 84,87,88,92,107,120,180,181 Taken together,
these studies support ﬂexible postoperative resumption
timing of LMWH bridging, to occur after 24 hours or
after 48 to 72 hours depending on the surgery/
procedure-related bleed risk, and when there is adequate
surgical site hemostasis.
19. In patients receiving LMWH bridging for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest administering
the ﬁrst post-operative LMWH bridging dose at
least 24 hours after a surgery/procedure over
administering it less than 24 hours after a surgery/
procedure (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
chestjournal.org e223
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 We suggest waiting at least 24 hours before resuming
LMWH bridging in patients having a low-to-
moderate-bleed-risk surgery/procedure and waiting at
least 48 to 72 hours before resuming LMWH bridging
in patients having a high-bleed-risk surgery/proced-
ure ( Table 2 ).
/C15 For patients in whom the management plan is to
delay resumption of LMWH bridging for 48 to 72
hours and who are considered at high risk for post-
operative VTE, low-dose LMWH can be administered
for the initial 2 to 3 days before the transition to
LMWH bridging.
PICO 20 : In patients receiving LMWH bridging,
should half the total daily dose of LMWH be given on
the day before the surgery/procedure vs administering
the full dose of LMWH?
Evidence. The evidence for administering half the total
dose of LMWH bridging on the day before the surgery/
procedure incorporates the evidence used for Guideline
Statement 18, shown above. 56,95,177,178 In addition, in the
BRIDGE and PERIOP-2 trials, which gave half the total
daily LMWH bridging dose on the day before the
surgery/procedure in patients who received pre-
operative bridging, this approach was associated with
low rates of perioperative major bleeding (3.2%,
1.6%).76,105
20. In patients receiving LMWH bridging for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest administering
half the total daily dose of LMWH the day prior to the
surgery/procedure over administering the full dose of
LMWH the day prior (Conditional Recommendation,
Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This guidance may apply more to patients having a
high-bleed-risk surgery, including patients having
neuraxial (spinal or epidural) anesthesia, rather than
in patients having a low-to-moderate-bleed-risk sur-
gery/procedure ( Table 2 ).
/C15 Administering half the total daily dose of LMWH can
be done by giving, on the morning of the day before
the surgery/procedure, only the morning dose of a
twice-daily LMWH regimen or approximately 50% of
the dose of a once-daily LWMH regimen.
PICO 21 : In patients receiving LMWH bridging,
should measurement of anti-factor Xa levels be
routinely done vs no anti-factor Xa measurements ?
Evidence. There are no studies that have compared a
perioperative LMWH bridging strategy with and
without pre-operative anti-factor Xa measurements.
Large randomized trials and prospective cohort studies
did not incorporate anti-factor Xa measurements as part
of perioperative management. 23,76,105
21. In patients receiving LMWH bridging for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against routine
measurement of anti-factor Xa levels to guide
perioperative LMWH management (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 There may be select patients undergoing high-bleed-
risk surgeries/procedures (ie, intracranial, spinal) or
patients who require an urgent (nonelective) surgery/
procedure where anti-factor Xa measurement may be
considered.
Patients Who Are Receiving a DOAC and
Require an Elective Surgery/Procedure
Background: The interruption of DOACs before an
elective surgery/procedure can follow a
pharmacokinetic-based approach, as used with the
perioperative management of other anticoagulants,
whereby the pre-operative interruption interval
corresponds to four to ﬁve elimination half-lives of each
DOAC.182,183 Given the DOAC half-lives of 9 to 14
hours, withholding DOACs for 2 full days before a
surgery/procedure, which corresponds more precisely to
a 60- to 68-hour interval (or four to ﬁve half-lives) from
the last DOAC dose until the surgery, should result in
minimal to no residual anticoagulant effect at the time of
surgery.184 This approach can be used for patients
having a high-bleed-risk surgery/procedure, whereas for
patients having a low-to-moderate-bleed-risk surgery/
procedure, withholding DOACs for 1 full day before the
procedure, which corresponds to a 30- to 36-hour
interruption interval (or approximately three DOAC
half-lives), should result in a residual anticoagulant
effect which is acceptable clinically for lower bleed risk
procedures. In all patients, no DOAC is taken on the day
of the surgery/procedure.
There are two important qualifying remarks to this
pharmacokinetic-based DOAC interruption
management strategy:
/C15 In dabigatran-treated patients with impaired renal
function (creatinine clearance [CrCl] < 50 mL/min),
interruption for 3 to 4 full days is required to allow for
e224 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
the longer time required for drug clearance as 75% to
80% of dabigatran clearance is by the kidney. 21,185
/C15 There may be selected patients in whom a longer
duration of pre-operative DOAC interruption may be
required, irrespective of the DOAC used. This may
include patients with severely impaired renal function
(CrCl < 30 mL/min) or hepatic function, and in those
who are taking drugs that, through inhibition of
CYP3A4 or P-glycoprotein pathways, may interfere
with DOAC clearance. 186-188
An alternative pre-operative management strategy
includes measurement of DOAC levels before the
surgery/procedure,189,190 which may be considered in
patients who require an urgent (ie, within 24 hours)
surgery, such as hip fracture repair. 191 A practical issue
with this approach is that routine coagulation function
tests such as the INR or aPTT may be insensitive to
exclude a residual preoperative DOAC effect, 192 thereby
necessitating the need to measure DOAC levels with
more sensitive but less widely available tests. These tests
consist of DOAC-calibrated anti-factor Xa levels for
apixaban, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban, and the dilute
thrombin time or ecarin clotting time for dabigatran;
however, questions remain as to their clinical
utility.193-195
Perioperative Interruption and Resumption of
DOACs and Heparin Bridging
PICOs 22-25 : In patients who are receiving a DOAC
(apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, or rivaroxaban) and
require an elective surgery/procedure, should DOACs
be interrupted for 1 to 2 days (1-4 days for dabigatran)
before a surgery/procedure vs interrupting DOACs
earlier?
Evidence. Two prospective studies assessed a
standardized perioperative DOAC management, with
standardized DOAC interruption. The ﬁrst was a
prospective management study of 541 dabigatran-
treated patients with atrial ﬁbrillation who required an
elective surgery/procedure; 24- and 48-hour DOAC
interruption intervals were adopted for low- and high-
bleed-risk surgeries/procedures, respectively. 185 This
approach was associated with low 30-day post-operative
rates of ATE (0.2%; 95% CI: 0-0.5) and major bleeding
(1.8%; 95% CI: 0.7-3.0). The second study, PAUSE, was
a prospective management study of 3,007 patients with
atrial ﬁbrillation taking a DOAC (apixaban, dabigatran,
or rivaroxaban) who required an elective surgery/
procedure and received standardized perioperative
management196; patients with severe renal insuf ﬁciency,
in whom DOAC therapy was not clinically indicated,
were excluded (CrCl < 25 mL/min if taking apixaban or
CrCl < 30 mL/min if taking dabigatran or rivaroxaban).
DOACs were interrupted for 1 day before and 1 day
after (2 days total) a low-to-moderate-bleed-risk
surgery/procedure and for 2 days before and 2 days after
(4 days total) a high-bleed-risk surgery/procedure. An
exception to this management occurred in a small
proportion of patients (2.7% [80 of 3,007]) who were
receiving dabigatran and had a CrCl < 50 mL/min in
whom the interruption interval was extended by 1 or
2 days depending on the surgery/procedure bleed risk.
With this overall management approach, 30-day post-
operative incidences of ATE and major bleeding,
respectively, were: 0.16% (95% CI: 0-0.48) and
1.35% (95% CI: 0-2.0) in the apixaban cohort (n ¼
1,257); 0.60% (95% CI: 0-1.33) and 0.9% (95% CI: 0-
1.73) in the dabigatran cohort (n ¼ 668); and
0.37% (95% CI: 0-0.82) and 1.85% (95% CI: 0-2.65) in
the rivaroxaban cohort (n ¼ 1,082).
Retrospective subanalyses of the major randomized
trials assessing DOACs vs warfarin in atrial ﬁbrillation
were done to assess perioperative DOAC management
but, in general, such management was not standardized
as the timing of DOAC interruption and resumption
varied and 15% to 20% of patients received heparin
bridging.8,10,80,85,197 A meta-analysis of > 19,000
patients who underwent a procedure in the randomized
trials comparing DOACs vs warfarin in atrial ﬁbrillation
was reported as well. 198 Taken together, these studies
reported rates of perioperative ATE of 0.5% to 1.0% and
rates of major bleeding of 2% to 5%, which are
comparable to rates observed in patients who receive
non-standardized VKA interruption and
resumption.23,198
Additional evidence relating to pre-operative DOAC
management involves patients undergoing catheter
ablation for atrial ﬁbrillation. An observational study
reported an increase in bleeding with periprocedural
DOAC continuation 199 while another reported no
difference in bleeding outcomes. 200 A 306-patient
randomized trial that compared 1-day DOAC
interruption vs no interruption found no signi ﬁcant
difference in bleeding outcomes (11.3% vs 9.7%; risk
difference ¼ 1.7%; 95% CI –5.5 to 8.8). 201 An
observational study assessing pacemaker/ICD
implantation and minimal DOAC interruption (ie,
skipping or delaying the immediate pre-procedure dose)
chestjournal.org e225
reported a low rate (1.6%) of major pocket
hematomas.173 A 25-patient observational study
assessing DOAC continuation in patients having
cataract surgery identi ﬁed no bleeding events. 202 An
observational study comparing perioperative DOAC
interruption and continuation in patients undergoing
low-bleed-risk procedures reported lower rates of overall
bleeding (OR ¼ 0.59; 95% CI: 0.39 to 0.91) and minor
bleeding (OR ¼ 0.59; 95% CI: 0.37 to 0.93) with DOAC
interruption, a ﬁnding that persisted after adjustment for
confounders (OR ¼ 0.62; 95% CI: 0.41
to 0.95). 203
It is noteworthy that almost all evidence pertaining to
perioperative DOAC management involves patients with
atrial ﬁbrillation. Few studies, limited to retrospective case
series, have assessed perioperative DOAC management in
patients with VTE. 204,205 There are no studies assessing
perioperative management in patients who are receiving
low-dose DOAC therapy (rivaroxaban 2.5 mg bid) and
ASA for stable coronary or peripheral arterial disease. 206
22. In patients receiving apixaban who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
apixaban for 1 to 2 days before the surgery/procedure
over apixaban continuation (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The number of days of pre-operative apixaban
interruption before the surgery/procedure will depend
on the bleed risk associated with the surgery/
procedure:
o 1 day off before low-to-moderate-bleed-risk;
o 2 days off before high-bleed-risk.
/C15 This management may be applied irrespective of
whether patients are receiving apixaban for atrial
ﬁbrillation or VTE.
23. In patients receiving dabigatran who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
dabigatran for 1 to 4 days before the surgery/
procedure over dabigatran continuation (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations :
/C15 The number of days of pre-operative dabigatran
interruption before the surgery/procedure will depend
on the bleed risk associated with the surgery/pro-
cedure and patient renal function:
o 1 day off before low-to-moderate-bleed-risk if
CrCl $ 50 mL/min;
o 2 days off before low-to-moderate-bleed-risk if
CrCl < 50 mL/min;
o 2 days off before high-bleed-risk if CrCl $ 50 mL/
min;
o 4 days off for high-bleed-risk if CrCl < 50 mL/min
(this extended duration of interruption of > 2 days
reﬂects the unique management of patients who are
receiving dabigatran and have a CrCl < 50 mL/min).
/C15 This management may be applied irrespective of
whether patients are receiving dabigatran for atrial
ﬁbrillation or VTE.
24. In patients receiving edoxaban who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
edoxaban for 1 to 2 days before the surgery/procedure
over edoxaban continuation (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The number of days of pre-operative edoxaban
interruption before the surgery/procedure will depend
on the bleed risk associated with the surgery/
procedure:
o 1 day off before low-to-moderate-bleed-risk;
o 2 days off before high-bleed-risk.
/C15 This management may be applied irrespective of
whether patients are receiving edoxaban for atrial
ﬁbrillation or VTE.
25. In patients receiving rivaroxaban who require an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest stopping
rivaroxaban for 1 to 2 days before the surgery/
procedure over rivaroxaban continuation (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The number of days of pre-operative rivaroxaban
interruption before the surgery/procedure will depend
on the bleed risk associated with the surgery/
procedure:
o 1 day off before low-to-moderate-bleed-risk;
o 2 days off before high-bleed-risk.
/C15 This management may be applied irrespective of
whether patients are receiving rivaroxaban for atrial
ﬁbrillation or VTE.
PICO 26 : In patients who require DOAC interruption
for an elective surgery/procedure, should perioperative
bridging be given vs no bridging?
Evidence. In a subanalysis of the RE-LY trial that
assessed patients with AF who were receiving open-
e226 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
label dabigatran (or warfarin) and required treatment
interruption for an elective surgery/procedure, those
who received perioperative LMWH bridging were at
higher risk for major bleeding than those who did
not receive bridging (6.5% vs 1.8%; P < .001), and
use of bridging had no signi ﬁcant effect on stroke/
systemic embolism outcomes (0.5% vs 0.3%; P ¼
.46).110 In a prospective patient registry of 901
DOAC-treated patients who required an elective
surgery, perioperative LMWH bridging was
associated with an increased risk for major bleeding
(OR ¼ 4.6; 95% CI: 1.1-9.9) with no signi ﬁcant effect
on thromboembolic outcomes (OR ¼ 1.9; 95% CI:
0.7-5.4). 207 In the aforementioned DOAC meta-
analysis, perioperative LMWH bridging was
associated with a threefold higher incidence of major
bleeding compared with the non-bridged group
(4.8% [95% CI: 3.4-6.2] vs 1.6% [95% CI: 1.2-2.0%]),
with no differences in the pooled rates of stroke/
systemic embolism. 198
26. In patients who require DOAC interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against
perioperative heparin bridging (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations :
/C15 The rapid offset and rapid onset of action of DOACs
obviate the need for heparin bridging with short-
acting anticoagulants such as UFH or LMWH in a
perioperative setting.
PICO 27 : In patients who had DOAC interruption for
an elective surgery/procedure, should DOACs be
resumed > 24 hours after a surgery/procedure
vs resuming DOACs within 24 hours?
Evidence. One randomized trial of 662 DOAC-treated
patients who required a pacemaker/ICD implantation
compared perioperative DOAC continuation (median
interval between pre- and post-procedure DOAC doses:
12 hours) and DOAC interruption (median interval: 72
hours) found no signi ﬁcant difference in pacemaker/ICD
pocket hematomas (OR ¼ 1.02; 95% CI: 0.36-2.87). 208
Evidence from the PAUSE study, as discussed above,
informs the incidence of major bleeding and ATE when
DOACs are resumed > 24 hours after a surgery/
procedure. Other evidence regarding post-operative
DOAC resumption timing is derived from the PAUSE
trial in which resumption was standardized at
approximately 24 hours (for a low-to-moderate-bleed-risk
surgery/procedure) and 48 to 72 hours (for a high-bleed-
risk surgery/procedure).
27. In patients who had DOAC interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest resuming
DOACs > 24 hours after a surgery/procedure over
resuming DOACs within 24 hours (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The resumption of DOACs post-operatively will
depend on the bleed risk associated with the surgery/
procedure:
o at least 24 hours after low-to-moderate-bleed-risk;
o 48-72 hours after high-bleed-risk.
/C15 DOACs have a rapid onset of action, with a peak
effect occurring 1 to 3 hours after intake, thereby
requiring cautious administration after a surgery/
procedure.
Perioperative Laboratory Measurement of DOAC
Therapy
Background: T h er o l eo fm e a s u r i n gD O A Cl e v e l s
before a surgery/procedure, akin to a pre-operative
measurement of the INR in VKA-treated patients, is
uncertain. 45,209,210 Unlike with an INR measurement
where a level < 1 . 5i sc o n s i d e r e ds a f et oa l l o wm o s t
surgery/procedures to proceed, 51 such a threshold
with DOACs is uncertain as levels of < 30 ng/mL
(the lower limit of detection of DOAC levels for some
assays) or < 50 ng/mL have been suggested. 211,212
Although a subanalysis of the PAUSE study suggested
that pre-operative DOAC levels < 30 ng/mL or 30 to
50 ng/mL were not associated with an increased risk for
perioperative bleeding, this study was underpowered to
assess such an association, and additional research is
needed to de ﬁne safe pre-operative DOAC levels
according to the surgery/procedure-related risk for
bleeding.213,214
Potential barriers for the clinical use of DOAC assays,
including relatively high costs and limited availability,
can be mitigated if laboratories are con ﬁgured to run
these assays with similar 20- to 30-minute turnaround
times as with the INR and aPTT, and provide the
requisite quality control measures. 215,216
PICO 28: In patients who interrupted a DOAC before a
surgery/procedure, should the anticoagulant effect of
DOACs routinely be measured with coagulation
chestjournal.org e227
function tests vs not measuring the anticoagulant effect
of DOACs?
Evidence. Although DOAC-level testing has been assessed
in various clinical settings,217-221 no studies have assessed
the clinical utility of measuring the residual anticoagulant
effect of a DOAC after its interruption before a surgery/
procedure. Speciﬁcally, no study has compared the safety
of a perioperative DOAC testing-driven strategy with a
strategy that does not involve DOAC-level testing.184 One
prospective registry assessed 422 patients who
interrupted DOACs with non-standardized intervals
(ranging from 1 to 218 hours), according to physician
discretion, and had DOAC levels measured just before the
surgery. In patients with a 49- to 72-hour interruption
interval, only 5% had a residual DOAC level > 30 ng/mL,
and none had a level > 50 ng/mL.222 A receiver-operator
curve analysis identi ﬁed a DOAC interruption interval
of 54 hours to best predict a residual anticoagulant
level # 30 ng/mL. In the PAUSE study, 85% (n¼ 2,541) of
patients had a DOAC level measured just before the
surgery/procedure, but this was not available for
clinical use and did not affect the DOAC interruption
protocol. 196 In the overall study population,
encompassing patients having a low-to-moderate-
bleed-risk and high-bleed-risk surgery/procedure, the
proportion of patients on apixaban (n ¼ 1,129),
dabigatran (n ¼ 563), and rivaroxaban (n ¼ 965) with a
pre-operative DOAC level < 50 ng/mL was 90.5%,
95.1%, and 96.8%, respectively. Patients having a high-
bleed-risk surgery/procedure or any neuraxial
anesthesia, in whom the interval between the last
DOAC dose and DOAC-level testing (just before the
surgery/procedure) was approximately 60 to 68
hours (corresponding to 2 full days off before the
surgery/procedure [4 days off if on dabigatran and CrCl
< 50 mL/min]), were consid ered separately given a
heightened concern about bleeding in the event of a
signiﬁcant residual DOAC level at surgery. In this
subgroup, the proportion of patients on apixaban (n ¼
335), dabigatran (n ¼ 183), and rivaroxaban (n ¼ 314)
with a DOAC level < 50 ng/mL was 97.9%, 99.4%, and
99.3%, respectively; the proportion with a DOAC
level < 30 ng/mL was 93.1%, 98.9%, and 85.3%,
respectively.
28. In patients who had DOAC interruption for an
elective surgery/procedure, we suggest against routine
DOAC coagulation function testing to guide
perioperative DOAC management (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 DOAC-level testing may be considered, on a case-by-
case basis, in nonelective perioperative clinical situa-
tions; for example, in patients who require an urgent/
emergency surgery/procedure in whom DOAC-level
testing may inform the need for active DOAC reversal
with administration of blood products or DOAC-
speciﬁc reversal agents.
Perioperative Management of Patients Who
Are Receiving Antiplatelet Drugs
Background: Knowledge of basic pharmacologic
properties of antiplatelet drugs will inform the timing of
perioperative interruption and resumption. When
interrupting ASA and the P2Y 12 inhibitors clopidogrel
and prasugrel, since these drugs irreversibly inhibit
platelet function, 7 to 10 days (ie, platelet life span) of
interruption is needed to restore platelet function. 223-225
When interrupting the P2Y 12 inhibitor ticagrelor, which
reversibly inhibits platelet function, at least 2 to 3 days of
interruption is needed to restore platelet function. 226,227
When resuming antiplatelet drugs post-operatively, a
maximal antiplatelet effect occurs within minutes after
taking ASA, within 2 hours after taking ticagrelor, and
occurs 4 to 5 days after resuming clopidogrel with a
(75 mg) maintenance dose only, and after 3 days after
resuming prasugrel. 226,228,229 If a loading dose of
clopidogrel is used, the maximal antiplatelet effect
occurs between 2 and 6 hours. 230,231 Less commonly
used reversible inhibitors of platelet function include
cilostazol, dipyridamole, and pentoxifylline, with half-
lives of 2 to 10 hours, 232-234 and vorapaxar, which has a
prolonged, 3- to 15-day antiplatelet effect.235 Nonsteroidal
antiinﬂammatory drugs have reversible antiplatelet
properties with half-lives that vary from 2 to 6 hours
(ibuprofen, ketoprofen, indomethacin), to 7 to 15 hours
(celecoxib, naproxen, diﬂunisal), to approximately 20
hours (meloxicam, nabumetone, piroxicam).236
Patients Having Non-cardiac Surgery
PICOs 29-32 : In patients receiving antiplatelet drugs
who require non-cardiac surgery, should antiplatelet
drugs be continued perioperatively vs stopping 7 to
10 days before surgery?
Evidence. One 80-patient trial compared 4 to 5 days
vs 10 days of ASA interruption before surgery, with
too few cardiovascular (n ¼ 1) or bleeding (n ¼ 0)
events for adequate interruption. 237 The PEP trial
involved 17,444 patients who required hip fracture
e228 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
repair or hip/knee joint replacement with patients
randomized to receive ASA or placebo started pre-
operatively and continued for 35 days. 238 ASA use was
associated with a decreased risk for VTE (RR ¼ 0.71;
95% CI: 0.54-0.94) and did not affect the risk for
clinically overt myocardial ischemia (RR ¼ 1.57;
95% CI: 0.93-2.65) or stroke (RR ¼ 1.13; 95% CI:
0.69-1.85) but conferred an increased risk for major
bleeding (2.9% vs 2.4%; P ¼ .04). In a randomized
trial of 220 patients who were at high cardiovascular
risk and were undergoing surgery, ASA (or placebo)
was started 7 days before surgery and continued for
30 days. 239 Patients in the ASA group had a lower
risk for major cardiovascular events (1.8% vs 9.0%;
95% CI: 1.3-13.0), but the study was underpowered to
detect a difference in bleeding. POISE-2 was a
randomized, placebo-controlled trial that assessed
immediate pre-operative ASA initiation (200 mg) or
ASA continuation in 10,010 patients with known or at
risk for coronary artery disease who were having
major non-cardiac surgery. 240 Perioperative ASA
initiation/continuation did not reduce the risk for
non-fatal myocardial infarction or death
(7.0% vs 7.1%; RR ¼ 0.99; 95% CI: 0.86-1.2), a
ﬁnding observed in both initiation and continuation
strata, but increased the risk for major bleeding
(4.6% vs 3.8%; RR ¼ 1.2; 95% CI: 1.01-1.50). The
interpretation of these results involves consideration
that post-operative nonsteroidal antiin ﬂammatory drug
use occurred in 37% of patients, which may have
impaired the cardioprotective effects of ASA 241;
moreover, major bleeding was increased in the ASA
initiation stratum (4.6% vs 3.5%; hazard ratio [HR] ¼
1.34; 95% CI: 1.03-1.74) but not the ASA continuation
stratum (4.6% vs 4.1%; HR ¼ 1.11; 95% CI: 0.84-
1.48). Smaller, likely underpowered, trials assessing
perioperative ASA interruption vs continuation or
single-dose pre-operative ASA administration reported
no signi ﬁcant difference in thromboembolic or
bleeding events. 242-245
No prospective studies have assessed perioperative
management of clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor in
non-cardiac surgery. Retrospective cohort studies of
clopidogrel suggest an increased risk of bleeding with
perioperative clopidogrel continuation. 246-248
29a. In patients receiving ASA who are
undergoing elective non-cardiac surgery, we
suggest ASA continuation over ASA interruption
(Conditional Recommendation, Moderate Certainty
of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This guidance may be modi ﬁed on a case-by-case
basis. For example, in select patients undergoing a
non-cardiac surgery associated with a high-bleed-risk
(eg, intracranial, spinal); if ASA interruption is
adopted, we suggest interruption for # 7 days.
29b. In patients receiving ASA therapy who are
undergoing elective non-cardiac surgery and require
ASA interruption , we suggest stopping ASA £ 7d a y s
instead of 7 to 10 days before the surgery (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This suggestion may be modi ﬁed on a case-by-case
basis, depending on individual patient circumstance;
for example, surgery-related bleeding risk.
30. In patients receiving clopidogrel who are
undergoing an elective non-cardiac surgery, we
suggest stopping clopidogrel 5 days instead of 7 to
10 days before the surgery (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This suggestion may be modi ﬁed on a case-by-case
basis, depending on individual patient circumstances;
for example, surgery-related bleeding risk.
31. In patients receiving ticagrelor who are
undergoing an elective non-cardiac surgery, we
suggest stopping ticagrelor 3 to 5 days instead of 7 to
10 days before the surgery (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This suggestion may be modi ﬁed on a case-by-case
basis, depending on individual patient circumstances;
for example, surgery-related bleeding risk.
32: In patients receiving prasugrel who are
undergoing an elective non-cardiac surgery, we
suggest stopping prasugrel 7 days instead of 7 to
10 days before the surgery (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This suggestion may be modi ﬁed on a case-by-case
basis, depending on individual patient circumstances;
for example, surgery-related bleeding risk.
PICO 33 : In patients receiving antiplatelet drugs who
require non-cardiac surgery, should antiplatelet drugs
be resumed # 24 hours or > 24 hours after surgery?
chestjournal.org e229
33. In patients who require antiplatelet drug
interruption for an elective surgery/procedure, we
suggest to resume antiplatelet drugs £ 24 hours
instead of > 24 hours after the surgery/procedure
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Patients Having Coronary Artery Bypass Graft
Surgery
PICO 34 : In patients receiving antiplatelet drugs who
require CABG surgery, should antiplatelet drugs be
continued perioperatively vs stopping antiplatelet drugs
7 to 10 days before CABG surgery?
PICO 35 : In patients receiving antiplatelet drugs who
require CABG surgery, should antiplatelet drugs be
resumed within 24 hours or $ 24 hours after CABG
surgery?
Evidence. Determining whether to continue or stop
antiplatelet drugs before CABG surgery is important
because of the need to minimize surgical-site bleeding,
which can cause life-threatening pericardial tamponade.
In a > 8,000-patient cohort study, ASA use within
5 days prior to CABG was associated with a reduction in
overall mortality without a concomitant increased risk
for re-operation for pericardial bleeding or need for
blood transfusion. 249 ATACAS was a randomized,
placebo-controlled trial assessing perioperative ASA use
in patients who required CABG surgery where patients
received ASA 100 mg, starting 1 to 2 hours ’pre-CABG
(prior ASA users stopped it 4 days ’ pre-surgery), or
placebo, with resumption within 24 hours ’ post-
CABG.250 After 30 days of follow-up, there was no
signiﬁcant effect of ASA on the outcomes of myocardial
infarction (13.8% vs 15.8%; RR ¼ 0.87; 95% CI: 0.71-
1.07), death, and other cardiovascular outcomes; ASA
use was not associated with an increased risk for re-
operation related to bleeding (1.8% vs 2.1%; RR ¼ 0.87;
95% CI: 0.47-1.6). Stopping ASA in prior users for at
least 4 days and restarting it just before surgery may
question the generalizability of the study results, whereas
continuing ASA perioperatively without interruption (as
in one of the treatment arms) may have better re ﬂected
what is done in clinical practice.
In patients who also are receiving the P2Y 12 inhibitor
clopidogrel, subanalyses of large trials involving
patients with acute coronary syndromes who
subsequently required CABG reported a 50% higher
risk for major bleeding and a 70% higher need for
transfusion requirements in patients who received
clopidogrel within 5 days before CABG. 251,252
Observational studies have also found increased
bleeding in patients who received clopidogrel within
5 days of CABG surgery. 253-255 In a subanalysis of the
PLATO trial, which compared ticagrelor with
clopidogrel in ASA-treated patients with an acute
coronary syndrome who needed CABG surgery, rates
of bleeding were similar in patients stopping
clopidogrel 7 days before surgery and those stopping
ticagrelor 24 to 72 hours before surgery. 256 Am e t a -
analysis of four randomized trials and one observational
study totaling 2,632 patients undergoing CABG surgery
that compared > 5d a y sv s < 5 days interruption of
clopidogrel found patients with a longer interruption
had a lower incidence of re-operation (1.8% vs 3.2%;
OR ¼ 0.47; 95% CI: 0.25-0.91) and major bleeding
(19.7% vs 30.2%; OR ¼ 0.71; 95% CI: 0.51-0.98) and
cardiovascular events.257
There are no randomized trials or trial subanalyses that
address the resumption of antiplatelet drugs post-
operatively. One 100-patient observational study
compared resuming ASA 1 hour or 6 hours ’post-CABG
surgery and reported no signi ﬁcant difference in
bleeding or transfusion requirement outcomes. 258
34. In patients who are receiving ASA and undergoing
CABG surgery, we suggest continuation of ASA over
interruption; in patients receiving a P2Y 12 inhibitor
drug, we suggest interruption of the P2Y 12 inhibitor
over continuation perioperatively (Conditional
Recommendation, Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 For pre-operative P2Y 12 interruption prior to the day
of surgery/procedure, we suggest:
o 7 days for prasugrel;
o 5 days for clopidogrel;
o 3 to 5 days for ticagrelor.
35. In patients receiving ASA or a P2Y 12 inhibitor
who are undergoing CABG surgery, we suggest
resuming the ASA or P2Y 12 inhibitor within 24 hours
after surgery compared to ‡ 24 hours after surgery
(Conditional Recommendation, Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations :
/C15 Resumption of antiplatelet therapy may be delayed in
patients who develop post-CABG thrombocytopenia
(platelet count < 50,000 /C2 109/L), typically occurring
with on-pump surgery.
e230 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
Perioperative Measurement of Antiplatelet Therapy
PICO 36 : In patients who are receiving antiplatelet
therapy, should platelet function assays be routinely
used to measure antiplatelet effect vs no routine use of
antiplatelet function testing?
Evidence. Several platelet function assays have been
assessed mostly in patients having cardiac surgery or
percutaneous coronary interventions. 259,260 One
observational study (n ¼ 107) assessed platelet function
in patients who received or did not receive ASA around
the time of a colorectal surgery and found that impaired
platelet function observed with ASA continuation did
not affect the incidence of blood transfusion. 261 Other
studies have not shown a correlation between platelet
function assay results and clinical outcomes. 262,263
36. In patients receiving antiplatelet drug therapy who
are undergoing an elective surgery/procedure, we
suggest against the routine use of platelet function
testing prior to the surgery/procedure to guide
perioperative antiplatelet management (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Platelet function testing could be used with a possible
small beneﬁt and little harm in certain scenarios such
as patients undergoing CABG surgery who have
recently started taking a P2Y 12 inhibitor. Costs would
be moderate for implementation.
Patients With Coronary Stents Having Surgery
PICOs 37-40 : In patients who require surgery within
6 weeks of placement of a bare-metal coronary stent or
within 12 months of placement of a drug-eluting
coronary stent, should ASA and clopidogrel be
continued vs stopping antiplatelet drugs 7 to 10 days
before surgery ?
Evidence. Perioperative antiplatelet management aims to
minimize the risk for stent thrombosis, which occurs in
2% to 5% of patients and is associated with mortality as
high as 50%. 264-269 A subanalysis of the POISE-2 trial
assessed 470 patients with a coronary stent who required
major non-cardiac surgery, with patients who were
allocated to continue ASA perioperatively exhibiting a
decrease in the incidence of myocardial infarction
(5.1% vs 11.0%; HR ¼ 0.44; 95% CI: 0.22-0.87) and a
small increase in major bleeding (4.6% vs 3.8%; HR ¼
1.22; 95% CI: 1.01-1.48). 270 In observational studies,
perioperative antiplatelet therapy interruption for
> 5 days was a predictor of major adverse
cardiovascular events (OR ¼ 2.11; 95% CI: 1.23-3.63), 271
as was no perioperative antiplatelet therapy (OR ¼ 3.73;
95% CI: 1.26-11.07). 272 A systematic review of patients
with coronary stents who required surgery found one
randomized trial and 15 observational studies assessing
at least six different perioperative antiplatelet
management strategies with variable rates of adverse
cardiovascular events (0%-21%) and bleeding (0%-22%),
and reported no observable pattern of adverse outcome
incidence using a given management strategy. 273
The timing of surgery after coronary stenting balances
the urgency of an elective surgery (eg, cancer
resection) and the cardiovascular risk relating to the
time interval since stenting. Observational studies of
patients with coronary stents who required surgery
provide evidence to inform this issue. In a
retrospective study of 20,590 patients with coronary
stents who underwent surgery, the risk for adverse
cardiovascular outcomes appeared highest in the initial
6 weeks after stent placement (8%10%) but appeared
to plateau at 6 months (1%-2%) and remain stable at
24 months. 274 In a linked administrative database
study comparing post-operative rates of adverse
cardiovascular outcomes in 4,303 patients with and
20,232 patients without recent (within 1 year) drug-
eluting coronary stent placement, stented patients had
a higher risk for myocardial infarction (1.6% vs 0.2%;
OR ¼ 4.82; 95% CI: 3.25-7.16) and cardiac death
(1.0% vs 0.2%; OR ¼ 5.87; 95% CI: 3.60-9.58), and
this increased risk was statistically signi ﬁcant only if
surgery was done within 1 month of stenting. 275
Bridging therapy during antiplatelet drug interruption
has been assessed with multiple strategies and
agents.276 One randomized trial assessed IV cangrelor,
a reversible ultra-short-acting P2Y 12 inhibitor
(elimination half-life of 3-6 minutes), as a bridging
agent in patients who were receiving and interrupted
P2Y12 inhibitor therapy prior to CABG surgery 277,278;
this 198-patient study reported no effect of bridging
on CABG-related bleeding (OR ¼ 1.15; 95% CI: 0.47-
2.79) or other adverse events (7.8% vs 5.2%; P ¼ .45).
Observational studies have investigated bridging with
IV UFH 279 or subcutaneous LMWH, 280 and bridging
with short-acting IV glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
(tiroﬁban, epti ﬁbatide) or cangrelor, with no clear
beneﬁts of these approaches. 281-285
We were unable to address management and outcomes
in these studies according to the stent type, whether
drug-eluting or bare-metal; consequently, the guideline
chestjournal.org e231
statements do not specify management according to
stent type. However, coronary stents implanted in
current practice are of the drug-eluting type.
37. In patients receiving ASA and a P2Y 12 inhibitor
with coronary stents placed within the last 6 to
12 weeks who are undergoing an elective surgery/
procedure, we suggest either continuation of both
antiplatelet agents or stopping one antiplatelet agent
within 7 to 10 days of surgery (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Either approach is reasonable depending on the
bleeding risk associated with the surgery/procedure if
antiplatelet therapy is continued and risk for acute
coronary syndrome/coronary stent thrombosis if an-
tiplatelet therapy is interrupted.
/C15 Several factors will weigh in the decision about
whether to continue dual antiplatelet therapy or
interrupt one agent including: the timing of stent
placement (whether closer to 6 weeks or 12 weeks);
the type of stent (drug-eluting or bare-metal); the
location of the stent (whether at a dominant coronary
artery or not); and the number and length of stents
implanted.
38. In patients receiving ASA and a P2Y 12 inhibitor
who had coronary stents placed within the last 3 to
12 months and are undergoing an elective surgery/
procedure, we suggest stopping the P2Y 12 inhibitor
prior to surgery over continuation of the P2Y 12
inhibitor (Conditional Recommendation, Very Low
Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 This guidance is based on indirect evidence and
expert-based consensus that stopping P2Y 12 in-
hibitors in patients with stents > 3 months ’ post-
implantation is likely safe.
/C15 Several factors will weigh in the decision about
whether to continue or interrupt the P2Y 12 inhibitor,
including: the timing of stent placement (whether
closer to 3 months or 12 months); the type of stent
(drug-eluting or bare-metal); the location of the stent
(whether at a dominant coronary artery or not); and
the number and length of stents implanted.
39. In patients with coronary stents who require
interruption of antiplatelet drugs for an elective
surgery/procedure, we suggest against routine
bridging therapy with a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitor, cangrelor, or LMWH over routine use of
bridging therapy (Conditional Recommendation, Low
Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 A bridging approach may be considered in selected
high-risk patients; for example, in those with a recent
(within 3 months) coronary stent in a critical location.
40. In patients with coronary stents who require
continued dual antiplatelet therapy, we suggest
delaying an elective surgery/procedure over not
delaying the surgery/procedure (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 The duration of surgery/procedure delay is addressed
on a case-by-case basis and should consider the ur-
gency of the surgery/procedure, the time elapsed since
coronary stenting, and the risk pro ﬁle of the coronary
stenting (eg, critical location, multiple stents).
/C15 Regarding the timing of cessation of P2Y 12 inhibitors
or ASA, we refer to Guideline Statements 29a/b
through 33.
Patients Having a Minor Dental, Dermatologic, or
Ophthalmologic Procedure
PICOs 41-43: In patients who are receiving antiplatelet
drugs and require a minor dental, dermatologic, or
ophthalmologic procedure, should antiplatelet drugs be
continued vs stopping antiplatelet drugs 7 to 10 days
before the procedure?
Evidence. In patients having minor dental procedures,
small ( < 100 patients) randomized trials and cohort
studies suggest no increase in major bleeding with
ASA continuation. 146,286-290 In patients having minor
skin procedures, prospective cohort studies totaling
about 200 patients suggest a low ( < 1%) risk for
major bleeding with continuation of ASA. 291,292 In
patients having phacoemulsi ﬁcation (cataract) surgery,
prospective cohort studies have suggested a low
(< 1%) incidence of major bleeding with perioperative
ASA continuation. 159,160,293 In patients having eyelid
surgery, one 42-patient randomized trial compared
ASA continuation with no perioperative ASA use and
reported no signi ﬁcant effect on bleeding or
thromboembolic outcomes. 294 In patients having skin
procedures, one meta-analysis of two randomized
trials and 28 observational studies totaling > 14,000
patients found no signi ﬁcant increase in bleeding with
perioperative ASA continuation. 295 No studies have
e232 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
assessed the management of patients who are receiving
P2Y12 inhibitors alone and require minor dental, skin,
or eye procedures.
41. In patients receiving an antiplatelet drug (ASA or
P2Y12 inhibitor) who are undergoing a minor dental
procedure, we suggest continuing the antiplatelet
drug (ASA or the P2Y 12 inhibitor) over stopping the
antiplatelet agent before the procedure (Conditional
Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Patients who are receiving dual antiplatelet therapy
with ASA and a P2Y 12 inhibitor can continue ASA
and interrupt the P2Y 12 inhibitor.
42. In patients receiving an antiplatelet drug (ASA or
P2Y12 inhibitor) who are undergoing a minor
dermatologic procedure, we suggest continuing the
antiplatelet drug (ASA or P2Y 12 inhibitor) over
stopping the antiplatelet drug before the procedure
(Conditional Recommendation, Very Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Patients who are receiving dual antiplatelet therapy
with ASA and a P2Y 12 inhibitor can continue ASA
and interrupt the P2Y 12 inhibitor.
43. In patients receiving an antiplatelet drug (ASA
or P2Y 12 inhibitor) undergoing a minor
ophthalmologic procedure, we suggest continuing the
antiplatelet drug (ASA or P2Y 12 inhibitor)
throughout the ophthalmologic procedure over
stopping the antiplatelet agent before the procedure
(Conditional Recommendation, Low Certainty of
Evidence).
Guideline Implementation Considerations:
/C15 Patients who are receiving dual antiplatelet therapy
with ASA and a P2Y 12 inhibitor can continue ASA
and interrupt the P2Y 12 inhibitor.
Perioperative Antithrombotic Patient Care
Pathways
Based on the evidence presented, perioperative
antithrombotic patient care pathways are shown in
Figure 1 , Figure 2 ,a n d Figure 3 . These pathways can be
used to inform individual patient management and to
develop standardized care paths for clinics or
institutions. Figure 1 pertains to patients receiving a
VKA and provides guidance on whether to interrupt
VKA therapy perioperatively, how to interrupt VKA
pre-operatively (if interruption is needed), whether to
use heparin bridging therapy and how to bridge, and
how to restart VKA and bridging therapy (if used) post-
–7 –6 –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 4 5
Minimal-bleed-risk
Low-to-moderate-bleed-risk
High-bleed-risk
Warfarin
Warfarin Warfarin*
Warfarin
LMWH** LMWH**  
LMWH**
Warfarin*
LMWH**†  
Legend
*Warfarin can be resumed on the evening of procedure (D0) for most patients, or the day after procedure (i.e., D1) at the 
patient’s usual maintenance dose.
**Bridging suggested for high thrombotic risk populations with full-dose, subcutaneous LMWH (e.g., enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg bid or 
1.5 mg/kg daily or dalteparin, 100 IU/kg bid or 200 IU/kg daily), with the last dose given the AM of the day prior to the procedure 
(i.e., D-1) at half the total daily dose.
†Low-dose LMWH (e.g., enoxaparin, 40 mg daily or dalteparin 5,000 IU daily) can be used for VTE prophylaxis for first 24-72 hours
post-procedure, with full dose LMWH resumed 2-3 days post-procedure.
Day of Surgery/Procedure 
Figure 1 – Perioperative management of vitamin K antagonists (warfarin). LMWH ¼ low-molecular-weight heparin.
chestjournal.org e233
operatively. Figure 2 pertains to patients receiving a
DOAC and provides guidance on whether to interrupt
DOAC therapy perioperatively, and if interruption is
needed, how to interrupt DOAC therapy based on
surgical/procedural bleed risk in the pre- and post-
operative period. Figure 3 pertains to patients who are
Direct Oral
Anticoagulant
Procedure
Bleeding
Risk
Pre-Procedure DOAC Interruption Post-Procedure Resumption*
Day -6 Day -5 Day -4 Day -3 Day -2 Day -1 Day +1 Day +2 Day +3 Day +4
Apixaban
High
Low/Mod
Dabigatran 
(CrCl ≥ 50
ml/min)
High
Low/Mod
Dabigatran
(CrCl < 50
ml/min)
High
Low/Mod
Edoxaban High
Low/Mod
Rivaroxaban
High
Low/Mod
No DOAC administered that day
*DOAC can be resumed ~24 hours after low/moderate-bleed-risk procedures, and 48-72 hours after high-bleed-risk 
procedures. In selected patients at high risk for VTE, low-dose anticoagulants (i.e., enoxaparin, 40 mg daily or 
dalteparin, 5,000 IU daily) can be given for the first 48-72 hours post-procedure.
Surgery/Procedure (Day 0)
Figure 2 – Perioperative management of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs). CrCl ¼ creatinine clearance.
ASA continued* 
Cangrelor** Cangrelor**
Clopidogrel††
Prasugrel§
P2Y12 inhibitors***
–9 –8 –7 –6 –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 –1–6 h 0 +4–6 h Day +1
Legend:
*Based on surgery/procedure bleed risk assessment.
**Routine use not suggested. If used, initiate within 72 hours from P2Y12  inhibitor discontinuation at dose of 0.75 mg/kg/min;
resume within 6 hours  post-procedure for minimum of 48 hours and maximum of 7 days total. Very low quality data for
antiplatelet bridging with glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors  (e.g., eptifibatide, tirofiban).
***P2Y12 inhibitors can be resumed within 24 hours post-procedure at a maintenance dose. 
†For ticagrelor, 3-5 day interruption
††For clopidogrel, 5 day interruption
§For prasugrel, 7-10 day interruption.
Day of Surgery/Procedure 
Ticagrelor†
Figure 3 – Perioperative management of antiplatelet drugs. ASA ¼ aspirin.
e234 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
receiving antiplatelet therapy and provides guidance on
the timing of peri-operative interruption and
resumption based on the type of antiplatelet agent (ie,
ASA, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor).
Future Research
Although there have been important advances in the
perioperative management of anticoagulant and
antiplatelet therapy, much work remains to bridge
gaps in knowledge. In VKA-treated patients with a
mechanical heart valve, there is a need for well-
designed studies, especia lly randomized trials, to
f u r t h e ra s s e s st h en e e df o rp e r i o p e r a t i v eh e p a r i n
bridging during VKA interruption. In DOAC-treated
patients, there is a need for additional research
and consensus among clinicians as to safe DOAC
interruption intervals before neuraxial anesthesia or
regional nerve block procedures, and for patients with
severe chronic kidney disease, with a CrCl < 30 mL/
min. Further research is also needed as to the
perioperative management of patients who are
receiving low-dose DOAC regimens, whether in
combination with ASA for chronic coronary or
peripheral arterial dise ase or for the secondary
prevention of VTE and those who are receiving
antiplatelet monotherapy with a P2Y 12 inhibitor. A
challenging area of research is the perioperative
management of antiplatelet drugs, especially in those
patients with coronary stents who are receiving ASA
and a P2Y 12 inhibitor, as there are multiple factors
(timing of stent placement, type of surgery, type of
antiplatelet therapy) that make it dif ﬁcult to undertake
randomized trials. In all patient groups, the role of
perioperative laboratory testing that includes anti-
factor Xa levels during heparin bridging, DOAC anti-
factor Xa levels and dilute thrombin time testing,
antiplatelet function testing, and viscoelastic testing,
remains uncertain. Resea rch is also needed to inform
perioperative anticoagulant management of special
patient populations (eg, those who are dialysis-
dependent). Finally, although beyond the scope of this
guideline, research is needed in patients who require
an urgent/emergency surgery to inform best practices,
including the role of laboratory and point-of-care
assays to measure DOAC levels, and the role of
anticoagulant and antiplat elet reversal strategies.
Acknowledgments
Author contributions: J. D. D. and A. C. S. served as the co-principal
authors; all authors contributed to the development of the guideline
methodology, analysis of evidence and writing of the manuscript.
Funding/support: The authors have reported to CHEST that no
funding was received for this study.
Financial/nonﬁnancial disclosures: A complete list of the
panelists’ COI and their management is shown in e-Appendix 1 .
Other contributions: The authors thank Dr Ioannis Koulas who is
supported by the Broxmeyer Fellowship in Clinical Thrombosis, as well
as Jennifer Cookingham, Andrew Dominello, Laura Hyppolite, and
Ariana McGinn for their assistance with the tables and ﬁgures.
Additional information: The e-Appendixes are available online under
"Supplementary Data ."
References
1. Spyropoulos AC, Al-Badri A, Sherwood MW, Douketis JD.
Periprocedural management of patients receiving a vitamin K
antagonist or a direct oral anticoagulant requiring an elective
procedure or surgery. J Thromb Haemost . 2016;14(5):875-885 .
2. Colacci M, Tseng EK, Sacks CA, Fralick M. Oral anticoagulant
utilization in the United States and United Kingdom. J Gen Intern
Med. 2020;35(8):2505-2507 .
3. Omling E, Jarnheimer A, Rose J, Bjork J, Meara JG, Hagander L.
Population-based incidence rate of inpatient and outpatient
surgical procedures in a high-income country. Br J Surg .
2018;105(1):86-95.
4. Gao L, Tadrous M, Knowles S, et al. Prior authorization and
Canadian public utilization of direct-acting oral anticoagulants.
Healthc Policy . 2017;13(2):68-78 .
5. Proietti M, Laroche C, Opolski G, et al. ‘Real-world’ atrial
ﬁbrillation management in Europe: observations from the 2-year
follow-up of the EURObservational Research Programme-Atrial
Fibrillation General Registry Pilot Phase. Europace. 2017;19(5):
722-733.
6. Steinberg BA, Gao H, Shrader P, et al. International trends in
clinical characteristics and oral anticoagulation treatment for
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: results from the GARFIELD-AF,
ORBIT-AF I, and ORBIT-AF II registries. Am Heart J . 2017;194:
132-140.
7. Williams BA, Honushefsky AM, Berger PB. Temporal trends in the
incidence, prevalence, and survival of patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation from 2004 to 2016. Am J Cardiol . 2017;120(11):
1961-1965.
8. Healey JS, Eikelboom J, Douketis J, et al. Periprocedural bleeding
and thromboembolic events with dabigatran compared with
warfarin: results from the Randomized Evaluation of Long-Term
Anticoagulation Therapy (RE-LY) randomized trial. Circulation.
2012;126(3):343-348.
9. Zulkiﬂy H, Lip GYH, Lane DA. Epidemiology of atrial ﬁbrillation.
Int J Clin Pract . 2018;72(3):e13070 .
10. Sherwood MW, Douketis JD, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of
temporary interruption of rivaroxaban compared with warfarin in
patients with nonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation: results from the
rivaroxaban once daily, oral, direct factor Xa inhibition compared
with vitamin K antagonism for prevention of stroke and embolism
trial in atrial ﬁbrillation (ROCKET AF). Circulation. 2014;129(18):
1850-1859.
11. Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, et al. 2014 ESC/ESA guidelines
on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and
management: the Joint Task Force on non-cardiac surgery:
cardiovascular assessment and management of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Society of
Anaesthesiology (ESA). Eur Heart J . 2014;35(35):2383-2431 .
12. Cruden NL, Harding SA, Flapan AD, et al. Previous coronary stent
implantation and cardiac events in patients undergoing noncardiac
surgery. Circ Cardiovasc Interv . 2010;3(3):236-242 .
13. Douketis JD, Berger PB, Dunn AS, et al. The perioperative
management of antithrombotic therapy: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th
Edition). Chest. 2008;133(suppl 6):299S-339S .
chestjournal.org e235
14. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA, et al. Perioperative
management of antithrombotic therapy: Antithrombotic Therapy
and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest.
2012;141(suppl 2):e326S-e350S .
15. Barnes GD, Ageno W, Ansell J, Kaatz S. Recommendation on the
nomenclature for oral anticoagulants: communication from the
SSC of the ISTH: reply. J Thromb Haemost . 2015;13(11):2132-2133.
16. Spencer NH, Sardo LA, Cordell JP, Douketis JD. Structure and
function of a perioperative anticoagulation management clinic.
Thromb Res . 2019;182:167-174 .
17. Dager WE, Ansell J, Barnes GD, et al. Reduce the Likelihood of
Patient Harm Associated with the Use of Anticoagulant Therapy":
Commentary from the Anticoagulation Forum on the Updated
Joint Commission NPSG.03.05.01 Elements of Performance. Jt
Comm J Qual Patient Saf . 2020;46(3):173-180 .
18. Lewis SZ, Diekemper R, Ornelas J, Casey KR. Methodologies for
the development of CHEST guidelines and expert panel reports.
Chest. 2014;146(1):182-192 .
19. Holbrook A, Schulman S, Witt DM, et al. Evidence-based
management of anticoagulant therapy: Antithrombotic Therapy
and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest.
2012;141(suppl 2):e152S-e184S .
20. Levy JH, Spyropoulos AC, Samama CM, Douketis J. Direct oral
anticoagulants: new drugs and new concepts. JACC Cardiovasc
Interv. 2014;7(12):1333-1351 .
21. Douketis JD. Pharmacologic properties of the new oral
anticoagulants: a clinician-oriented review with a focus on
perioperative management. Current Pharm Des . 2010;16(31):
3436-3441.
22. Hirsh J, Raschke R. Heparin and low-molecular-weight heparin: the
Seventh ACCP Conference on Antithrombotic and Thrombolytic
Therapy. Chest. 2004;126(suppl 3):188S-203S .
23. Siegal D, Yudin J, Kaatz S, Douketis JD, Lim W, Spyropoulos AC.
Periprocedural heparin bridging in patients receiving vitamin K
antagonists: systematic review and meta-analysis of bleeding and
thromboembolic rates. Circulation. 2012;126(13):1630-1639 .
24. Anderson DR, Morgano GP, Bennett C, et al. American Society of
Hematology 2019 guidelines for management of venous
thromboembolism: prevention of venous thromboembolism in
surgical hospitalized patients. Blood Adv . 2019;3(23):3898-3944 .
25. Spyropoulos AC, Brohi K, Caprini J, et al. Scienti ﬁc and
Standardization Committee Communication: guidance document
on the periprocedural management of patients on chronic oral
anticoagulant therapy: recommendations for standardized
reporting of procedural/surgical bleed risk and patient-speci ﬁc
thromboembolic risk. J Thromb Haemost . 2019;17(11):1966-1972 .
26. Levy JH, Douketis J, Weitz JI. Reversal agents for non-vitamin K
antagonist oral anticoagulants. Nat Rev Cardiol . 2018;15(5):
273-281.
27. Douketis JD, Healey JS, Brueckmann M, et al. Urgent surgery or
procedures in patients taking dabigatran or warfarin: analysis of
perioperative outcomes from the RE-LY trial. Thromb Res .
2016;139:77-81.
28. Levy JH, Ageno W, Chan NC, et al. When and how to use antidotes
for the reversal of direct oral anticoagulants: guidance from the SSC
of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost . 2016;14(3):623-627 .
29. Hart RG, Benavente O, McBride R, Pearce LA. Antithrombotic
therapy to prevent stroke in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: a meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med . 1999;131(7):492-501 .
30. Pearce LA, Hart RG, Halperin JL. Assessment of three schemes for
stratifying stroke risk in patients with nonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation.
Am J Med . 2000;109(1):54. 51 .
31. Gage BF, Fihn SD, White RH. Warfarin therapy for an
octogenarian who has atrial ﬁbrillation. Ann Intern Med .
2001;134(6):465-474.
32. Gage BF, van Walraven C, Pearce L, et al. Selecting patients with
atrial ﬁbrillation for anticoagulation: stroke risk strati ﬁcation in
patients taking aspirin. Circulation. 2004;110(16):2287-2292 .
33. Cannegieter SC, Rosendaal FR, Briet E. Thromboembolic and
bleeding complications in patients with mechanical heart valve
prostheses. Circulation. 1994;89(2):635-641 .
34. Hering D, Piper C, Bergemann R, et al. Thromboembolic and
bleeding complications following St. Jude medical valve
replacement: results of the German Experience with Low-Intensity
Anticoagulation Study. Chest. 2005;127(1):53-59 .
35. Tominaga R, Kurisu K, Ochiai Y, et al. A 10-year experience with
the Carbomedics cardiac prosthesis. Ann Thorac Surg . 2005;79(3):
784-789.
36. Douketis JD, Foster GA, Crowther MA, Prins MH, Ginsberg JS.
Clinical risk factors and timing of recurrent venous
thromboembolism during the initial 3 months of anticoagulant
therapy. Arch Intern Med . 2000;160(22):3431-3436 .
37. White R. The epidemiology of venous thromboembolism.
Circulation. 2003;107(23 suppl 1):14-18 .
38. Kyrle PA, Eichinger S. Deep vein thrombosis. Lancet.
2005;365(9465):1163-1174.
39. Mehta SR, Bainey KR, Cantor WJ, et al. 2018 Canadian
Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Association of Interventional
Cardiology Focused Update of the Guidelines for the Use of
Antiplatelet Therapy. Can J Cardiol . 2018;34(3):214-233 .
40. Valgimigli M, Bueno H, Byrne RA, et al. 2017 ESC focused update
on dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery disease developed in
collaboration with EACTS: the Task Force for dual antiplatelet
therapy in coronary artery disease of the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC) and of the European Association for Cardio-
Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J . 2018;39(3):213-260 .
41. Leary MC, Varade P. Perioperative stroke. Curr Neurol Neurosci
Rep. 2020;20(5):12 .
42. Weiss AJ, Svensson LG, Bakaeen FG. Temporal improvements in
perioperative stroke rates following coronary artery bypass grafting.
Curr Opin Cardiol . 2020;35(6):679-686 .
43. Kaatz S, Douketis JD, Zhou H, Gage BF, White RH. Risk of stroke
after surgery in patients with and without chronic atrial ﬁbrillation.
J Thromb Haemost . 2010;8(5):884-890 .
44. Chen AT, Patel M, Douketis JD. Perioperative management of
antithrombotic therapy: a case-based narrative review. Intern
Emerg Med . 2022;17(1):25-35 .
45. Shaw JR, Kaplovitch E, Douketis J. Periprocedural management of
oral anticoagulation. Med Clin North Am . 2020;104(4):709-726 .
46. Jamula E, Anderson J, Douketis JD. Safety of continuing warfarin
therapy during cataract surgery: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Thromb Res . 2009;124(3):292-299 .
47. Nematullah A, Alabousi A, Blanas N, et al. Dental surgery for
patients on anticoagulant therapy with warfarin: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Can Dent Assoc . 2009;75(1):41 .
48. Jamula E, Lloyd NS, Schwalm JD, Airaksinen KE, Douketis JD.
Safety of uninterrupted anticoagulation in patients requiring
elective coronary angiography with or without percutaneous
coronary intervention: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Chest.
2010;138(4):840-847.
49. Palamaras I, Semkova K. Perioperative management of and
recommendations for antithrombotic medications in
dermatological surgery. Br J Dermatol . 2015;172(3):597-605 .
50. Jamula E, Douketis JD, Schulman S. Perioperative anticoagulation
in patients having implantation of a cardiac pacemaker or
deﬁbrillator: a systematic review and practical management guide.
J Thromb Haemost . 2008;6(10):1615-1621 .
51. Narouze S, Benzon HT, Provenzano D, et al. Interventional Spine
and Pain Procedures in Patients on Antiplatelet and Anticoagulant
Medications (Second Edition): guidelines from the American
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, the European
Society of Regional Anaesthesia and Pain Therapy, the American
Academy of Pain Medicine, the International Neuromodulation
Society, the North American Neuromodulation Society, and the
World Institute of Pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med . 2018;43(3):225-262.
52. Bateman BT, Mhyre JM, Ehrenfeld J, et al. The risk and outcomes
of epidural hematomas after perioperative and obstetric epidural
e236 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
catheterization: a report from the Multicenter Perioperative
Outcomes Group Research Consortium. Anesth Analg .
2013;116(6):1380-1385.
53. Abayon M, Kolokythas A, Harrison S, Elad S. Dental management
of patients on direct oral anticoagulants: case series and literature
review. Quintessence Int . 2016;47(8):687-696 .
54. Feagins LA. Colonoscopy, polypectomy, and the risk of bleeding.
Med Clin North Am . 2019;103(1):125-135 .
55. Zollinger RM Jr. An updated traditional classi ﬁcation of inguinal
hernias. Hernia. 2004;8(4):318-322 .
56. Kovacs MJ, Kearon C, Rodger M, et al. Single-arm study of
bridging therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin for patients at
risk of arterial embolism who require temporary interruption of
warfarin. Circulation. 2004;110(12):1658-1663 .
57. Douketis JD, Frere C, Farge D; International Thrombosis and
Cancer Initiative members. 2019 International clinical practice
guidelines for the treatment of venous thromboembolism —
authors’ reply. Lancet Oncol . 2019;20(12):e656 .
58. D’Astous J, Liederman Z, Douketis JD. Venous thromboembolism
prophylaxis in high-risk orthopedic and cancer surgery. Postgrad
Med. 2021;133(suppl 1):20-26 .
59. Kataruka A, Renner E, Barnes GD. Evaluating the role of clinical
pharmacists in pre-procedural anticoagulation management. Hosp
Pract (1995) . 2018;46(1):16-21 .
60. Mihalj M, Carrel T, Gregoric ID, et al. Telemedicine for
preoperative assessment during a COVID-19 pandemic:
recommendations for clinical care. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol .
2020;34(2):345-351.
61. Flaker GC, Theriot P, Binder LG, Dobesh PP, Cuker A,
Doherty JU. Management of periprocedural anticoagulation: a
survey of contemporary practice. JA mC o l lC a r d i o l. 2016;68(2):
217-226.
62. Douketis JD, Syed S, Li N, et al. A physician survey of perioperative
neuraxial anesthesia management in patients on a direct oral
anticoagulant. Res Pract Thromb Haemost . 2021;5(1):159-167 .
63. Kurlander JE, Barnes GD, Anderson MA, et al. Mind the gap:
results of a multispecialty survey on coordination of care for peri-
procedural anticoagulation. J Thromb Thrombolysis . 2018;45(3):
403-409.
64. Broderick JP, Bonomo JB, Kissela BM, et al. Withdrawal of
antithrombotic agents and its impact on ischemic stroke
occurrence. Stroke. 2011;42(9):2509-2514 .
65. Steinberg BA, Hellkamp AS, Lokhnygina Y, et al. Use and
outcomes of antiarrhythmic therapy in patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation receiving oral anticoagulation: results from the
ROCKET AF trial. Heart Rhythm . 2014;11(6):925-932 .
66. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Going from evidence to
recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7652):1049-1051 .
67. Alonso-Coello P, Oxman AD, Moberg J, et al. GRADE Evidence to
Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic and transparent approach
to making well informed healthcare choices. 2: clinical practice
guidelines. BMJ. 2016;353:i2089 .
68. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gotzsche PC, et al. The Cochrane
Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials.
BMJ. 2011;343:d5928 .
69. Jones J, Hunter D. Consensus methods for medical and health
services research. BMJ. 1995;311(7001):376-380 .
70. Ansell J, Hirsh J, Hylek E, Jacobson A, Crowther M, Palareti G.
Pharmacology and management of the vitamin K antagonists:
American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical
Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008;133(suppl 6):
160S-198S.
71. Palareti G, Legnani C. Warfarin withdrawal. Pharmacokinetic-
pharmacodynamic considerations. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1996;30(4):
300-313.
72. Ufer M. Comparative pharmacokinetics of vitamin K antagonists:
warfarin, phenprocoumon and acenocoumarol. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 2005;44(12):1227-1246 .
73. Gadisseur AP, van der Meer FJ, Adriaansen HJ, Fihn SD,
Rosendaal FR. Therapeutic quality control of oral anticoagulant
therapy comparing the short-acting acenocoumarol and the long-
acting phenprocoumon. Br J Haematol . 2002;117(4):940-946 .
74. Hylek EM, Regan S, Go AS, Hughes RA, Singer DE, Skates SJ.
Clinical predictors of prolonged delay in return of the international
normalized ratio to within the therapeutic range after excessive
anticoagulation with warfarin. Ann Intern Med . 2001;135(6):
393-400.
75. Kamali F, Wynne H. Pharmacogenetics of warfarin. Annu Rev
Med. 2010;61:63-75 .
76. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, et al. Perioperative bridging
anticoagulation in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation. N Engl J Med .
2015;373(9):823-833.
77. Selim M. Perioperative stroke. N Engl J Med . 2007;356(7):706-713 .
78. White RH, McKittrick T, Hutchinson R, Twitchell J. Temporary
discontinuation of warfarin therapy: changes in the international
normalized ratio. Ann Intern Med . 1995;122(1):40-42 .
79. Steib A, Barre J, Mertes M, et al. Can oral vitamin K before elective
surgery substitute for preoperative heparin bridging in patients on
vitamin K antagonists? J Thromb Haemost . 2010;8(3):499-503 .
80. Douketis JD, Murphy SA, Antman EM, et al. Peri-operative adverse
outcomes in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation taking warfarin or
edoxaban: analysis of the ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 Trial. Thromb
Haemost. 2018;118(6):1001-1008 .
81. Garcia DA, Regan S, Henault LE, et al. Risk of thromboembolism
with short-term interruption of warfarin therapy. Arch Intern Med .
2008;168(1):63-69.
82. Qureshi AI, Jahangir N, Malik AA, Afzal MR, Or ﬁ F, Suri MF. Risk
of ischemic stroke in high risk atrial ﬁbrillation patients during
periods of warfarin discontinuation for surgical procedures.
Cerebrovasc Dis . 2016;42(5-6):346-351 .
83. Constans M, Santamaria A, Mateo J, Pujol N, Souto JC,
Fontcuberta J. Low-molecular-weight heparin as bridging therapy
during interruption of oral anticoagulation in patients who
require colonoscopy or gastroscopy. Int J Clin Pract . 2007;61(2):
212-217.
84. Daniels PR, McBane RD, Litin SC, et al. Peri-procedural
anticoagulation management of mechanical prosthetic heart valve
patients. Thromb Res . 2009;124(3):300-305 .
85. Garcia D, Alexander JH, Wallentin L, et al. Management and
clinical outcomes in patients treated with apixaban vs warfarin
undergoing procedures. Blood. 2014;124(25):3692-3698 .
86. Hammerstingl C, Tripp C, Schmidt H, et al. Periprocedural
bridging therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin in chronically
anticoagulated patients with prosthetic mechanical heart valves:
experience in 116 patients from the prospective BRAVE registry.
J Heart Valve Dis . 2007;16(3):285-292 .
87. Malato A, Saccullo G, Lo Coco L, et al. Patients requiring
interruption of long-term oral anticoagulant therapy: the use of
ﬁxed sub-therapeutic doses of low-molecular-weight heparin.
J Thromb Haemost . 2010;8(1):107-113 .
88. Pengo V, Cucchini U, Denas G, et al. Standardized low-molecular-
weight heparin bridging regimen in outpatients on oral
anticoagulants undergoing invasive procedure or surgery: an
inception cohort management study. Circulation. 2009;119(22):
2920-2927.
89. Tinker JH, Tarhan S. Discontinuing anticoagulant therapy in
surgical patients with cardiac valve prostheses. Observations in 180
operations. JAMA. 1978;239(8):738-739 .
90. Tinmouth AH, Morrow BH, Cruickshank MK, Moore PM,
Kovacs MJ. Dalteparin as periprocedure anticoagulation for
patients on warfarin and at high risk of thrombosis. Ann
Pharmacother. 2001;35(6):669-674 .
91. Witt DM, Delate T, McCool KH, et al. Incidence and predictors of
bleeding or thrombosis after polypectomy in patients receiving and
not receiving anticoagulation therapy. J Thromb Haemost .
2009;7(12):1982-1989.
chestjournal.org e237
92. Wysokinski WE, McBane RD, Daniels PR, et al. Periprocedural
anticoagulation management of patients with nonvalvular atrial
ﬁbrillation. Mayo Clin Proc . 2008;83(6):639-645 .
93. Spandorfer JM, Lynch S, Weitz HH, et al. Use of enoxaparin for the
chronically anticoagulated patient before and after procedures. Am
J Cardiol . 1999;84(4):478-480. A410 .
94. Spyropoulos AC, Jenkins P, Bornikova L. A disease management
protocol for outpatient perioperative bridge therapy with
enoxaparin in patients requiring temporary interruption of long-
term oral anticoagulation. Pharmacotherapy. 2004;24(5):649-658 .
95. Douketis JD, Johnson JA, Turpie AG. Low-molecular-weight
heparin as bridging anticoagulation during interruption of
warfarin: assessment of a standardized periprocedural
anticoagulation regimen. Arch Intern Med . 2004;164(12):
1319-1326.
96. Beldi G, Beng L, Siegel G, Bisch-Knaden S, Candinas D. Prevention
of perioperative thromboembolism in patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation. Br J Surg . 2007;94(11):1351-1355 .
97. Schulman S, Hwang HG, Eikelboom JW, Kearon C, Pai M,
Delaney J. Loading dose vs. maintenance dose of warfarin for
reinitiation after invasive procedures: a randomized trial. J Thromb
Haemost. 2014;12(8):1254-1259 .
98. Bungard TJ, Mutch J, Ritchie B. A randomized trial of restarting
warfarin at maintenance versus loading doses following an elective
procedure. J Thromb Thrombolysis . 2017;44(4):507-515 .
99. Woods K, Douketis JD, Kathirgamanathan K, Yi Q, Crowther MA.
Low-dose oral vitamin K to normalize the international normalized
ratio prior to surgery in patients who require temporary
interruption of warfarin. J Thromb Thrombolysis . 2007;24(2):93-97.
100. Shields RC, McBane RD, Kuiper JD, Li H, Heit JA. Ef ﬁcacy and
safety of intravenous phytonadione (vitamin K1) in patients on
long-term oral anticoagulant therapy. Mayo Clin Proc . 2001;76(3):
260-266.
101. Tsu LV, Dienes JE, Dager WE. Vitamin K dosing to reverse
warfarin based on INR, route of administration, and home warfarin
dose in the acute/critical care setting. Ann Pharmacother .
2012;46(12):1617-1626.
102. Kulig CE, Roberts AJ, Rowe AS, Kim H, Dager WE. INR response
to low-dose vitamin K in warfarin patients. Ann Pharmacother .
2021;55(10):1223-1229.
103. Polito NB, Kanouse E, Jones CMC, McCann M, Refaai MA,
Acquisto NM. Effect of vitamin K administration on rate of
warfarin reversal. Transfusion. 2019;59(4):1202-1208 .
104. Meehan R, Tavares M, Sweeney J. Clinical experience with oral
versus intravenous vitamin K for warfarin reversal. Transfusion.
2013;53(3):491-498. quiz 490 .
105. Kovacs MJ, Wells PS, Anderson DR, et al. Postoperative low
molecular weight heparin bridging treatment for patients at high
risk of arterial thromboembolism (PERIOP2): double blind
randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2021;373:n1205 .
106. Steinberg BA, Peterson ED, Kim S, et al. Use and outcomes
associated with bridging during anticoagulation interruptions in
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: ﬁndings from the Outcomes
Registry for Better Informed Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation
(ORBIT-AF). Circulation. 2015;131(5):488-494 .
107. Bui HT, Krisnaswami A, Le CU, Chan J, Shenoy BN. Comparison
of safety of subcutaneous enoxaparin as outpatient anticoagulation
bridging therapy in patients with a mechanical heart valve versus
patients with nonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation. Am J Cardiol .
2009;104(10):1429-1433.
108. Ferreira I, Dos L, Tornos P, Nicolau I, Permanyer-Miralda G, Soler-
Soler J. Experience with enoxaparin in patients with mechanical
heart valves who must withhold acenocumarol. Heart. 2003;89(5):
527-530.
109. Spyropoulos AC, Turpie AG, Dunn AS, et al. Perioperative bridging
therapy with unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight
heparin in patients with mechanical prosthetic heart valves on
long-term oral anticoagulants (from the REGIMEN Registry). Am J
Cardiol. 2008;102(7):883-889 .
110. Douketis JD, Healey JS, Brueckmann M, et al. Perioperative
bridging anticoagulation during dabigatran or warfarin
interruption among patients who had an elective surgery or
procedure. Substudy of the RE-LY trial. Thromb Haemost .
2015;113(3):625-632.
111. Barnes GD, Li Y, Gu X, et al. Periprocedural bridging
anticoagulation in patients with venous thromboembolism: a
registry-based cohort study. J Thromb Haemost . 2020;18(8):
2025-2030.
112. McBane RD, Wysokinski WE, Daniels PR, et al. Periprocedural
anticoagulation management of patients with venous
thromboembolism. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2010;30(3):
442-448.
113. Clark NP, Witt DM, Davies LE, et al. Bleeding, recurrent venous
thromboembolism, and mortality risks during warfarin
interruption for invasive procedures. JAMA Intern Med .
2015;175(7):1163-1168.
114. Tafur AJ, Wysokinski WE, McBane RD, et al. Cancer effect on
periprocedural thromboembolism and bleeding in anticoagulated
patients. Ann Oncol . 2012;23(8):1998-2005 .
115. Skeith L, Taylor J, Lazo-Langner A, Kovacs MJ. Conservative
perioperative anticoagulation management in patients with chronic
venous thromboembolic disease: a cohort study. J Thromb
Haemost. 2012;10(11):2298-2304 .
116. Wysokinska EM, Wysokinski WE, Ketha S, et al. Periprocedural
anticoagulation management of patients with thrombophilia. Am J
Med. 2016;129(9):986-992 .
117. Baumgartner C, de Kouchkovsky I, Whitaker E, Fang MC.
Periprocedural bridging in patients with venous thromboembolism:
a systematic review. Am J Med . 2019;132(6):722-732.e7 .
118. Douketis JD, Kearon C, Bates S, Duku EK, Ginsberg JS. Risk of fatal
pulmonary embolism in patients with treated venous
thromboembolism. JAMA. 1998;279(6):458-462 .
119. Halbritter KM, Wawer A, Beyer J, Oettler W, Schellong SM.
Bridging anticoagulation for patients on long-term vitamin-K-
antagonists. A prospective 1 year registry of 311 episodes. J Thromb
Haemost. 2005;3(12):2823-2825 .
120. Jaffer AK, Ahmed M, Brotman DJ, et al. Low-molecular-weight-
heparins as periprocedural anticoagulation for patients on long-
term warfarin therapy: a standardized bridging therapy protocol.
J Thromb Thrombolysis . 2005;20(1):11-16 .
121. Yong JW, Yang LX, Ohene BE, Zhou YJ, Wang ZJ. Periprocedural
heparin bridging in patients receiving oral anticoagulation: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord .
2017;17(1):295.
122. Attaya H, Wysokinski WE, Bower T, et al. Three-month cumulative
incidence of thromboembolism and bleeding after periprocedural
anticoagulation management of arterial vascular bypass patients.
J Thromb Thrombolysis . 2013;35(1):100-106 .
123. Borea G, Montebugnoli L, Capuzzi P, Magelli C. Tranexamic acid
as a mouthwash in anticoagulant-treated patients undergoing oral
surgery. An alternative method to discontinuing anticoagulant
therapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol . 1993;75(1):29-31 .
124. Evans IL, Sayers MS, Gibbons AJ, Price G, Snooks H, Sugar AW.
Can warfarin be continued during dental extraction? Results of a
randomized controlled trial. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 2002;40(3):
248-252.
125. Sacco R, Sacco M, Carpenedo M, Moia M. Oral surgery in patients
on oral anticoagulant therapy: a randomized comparison of
different INR targets. J Thromb Haemost . 2006;4(3):688-689 .
126. Al-Belasy FA, Amer MZ. Hemostatic effect of n-butyl-2-
cyanoacrylate (histoacryl) glue in warfarin-treated patients
undergoing oral surgery. J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 2003;61(12):
1405-1409.
127. Carter G, Goss A. Tranexamic acid mouthwash — a prospective
randomized study of a 2-day regimen vs 5-day regimen to prevent
postoperative bleeding in anticoagulated patients requiring dental
extractions. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 2003;32(5):504-507 .
128. Carter G, Goss A, Lloyd J, Tocchetti R. Tranexamic acid
mouthwash versus autologous ﬁbrin glue in patients taking
e238 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
warfarin undergoing dental extractions: a randomized prospective
clinical study. J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 2003;61(12):1432-1435 .
129. Halfpenny W, Fraser JS, Adlam DM. Comparison of 2 hemostatic
agents for the prevention of postextraction hemorrhage in patients
on anticoagulants. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod. 2001;92(3):257-259 .
130. Ramstrom G, Sindet-Pedersen S, Hall G, Blomback M, Alander U.
Prevention of postsurgical bleeding in oral surgery using
tranexamic acid without dose modi ﬁcation of oral anticoagulants.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 1993;51(11):1211-1216 .
131. Bajkin BV, Popovic SL, Selakovic SD, Bajkin BV, Popovic SL,
Selakovic SDJ. Randomized, prospective trial comparing bridging
therapy using low-molecular-weight heparin with maintenance of
oral anticoagulation during extraction of teeth. J Oral Maxillofac
Surg. 2009;67(5):990-995 .
132. Cannon PD, Dharmar VT. Minor oral surgical procedures in
patients on oral anticoagulants — a controlled study. Aust Dent J .
2003;48(2):115-118.
133. Devani P, Lavery KM, Howell CJ. Dental extractions in patients on
warfarin: is alteration of anticoagulant regime necessary? Br J Oral
Maxillofac Surg . 1998;36(2):107-111 .
134. Gaspar R, Brenner B, Ardekian L, Peled M, Laufer D. Use of
tranexamic acid mouthwash to prevent postoperative bleeding in
oral surgery patients on oral anticoagulant medication.
Quintessence Int . 1997;28(6):375-379 .
135. Saour JN, Ali HA, Mammo LA, Sieck JO. Dental procedures in
patients receiving oral anticoagulation therapy. J Heart Valve Dis .
1994;3(3):315-317.
136. Street AM, Leung W. Use of tranexamic acid mouthwash in dental
procedures in patients taking oral anticoagulants. Med J Aust .
1990;153(10):630.
137. Zanon E, Martinelli F, Bacci C, Cordioli G, Girolami A. Safety of
dental extraction among consecutive patients on oral anticoagulant
treatment managed using a speci ﬁc dental management protocol.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis . 2003;14(1):27-30 .
138. Blinder D, Manor Y, Martinowitz U, Taicher S. Dental extractions
in patients maintained on oral anticoagulant therapy: comparison
of INR value with occurrence of postoperative bleeding. Int J Oral
Maxillofac Surg . 2001;30(6):518-521 .
139. Della Valle A, Sammartino G, Marenzi G, et al. Prevention of
postoperative bleeding in anticoagulated patients undergoing oral
surgery: use of platelet-rich plasma gel. J Oral Maxillofac Surg .
2003;61(11):1275-1278.
140. Martinowitz U, Mazar AL, Taicher S, et al. Dental extraction for
patients on oral anticoagulant therapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol. 1990;70(3):274-277 .
141. Ramli R, Rahman RA. Minor oral surgery in anticoagulated
patients: local measures alone are suf ﬁcient for haemostasis.
Singapore Dental J . 2005;27(1):13-16 .
142. Russo G, Corso LD, Biasiolo A, Berengo M, Pengo V. Simple and
safe method to prepare patients with prosthetic heart valves for
surgical dental procedures. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost . 2000;6(2):
90-93.
143. Zusman SP, Lustig JP, Baston I. Postextraction hemostasis in
patients on anticoagulant therapy: the use of a ﬁbrin sealant.
Quintessence Int . 1992;23(10):713-716 .
144. Keiani Motlagh K, Loeb I, Legrand W, Daelemans P, Van Reck J.
Prevention of postoperative bleeding in patients taking oral
anticoagulants. Effects of tranexamic acid [in French]. Rev Stomatol
Chir Maxillofac . 2003;104(2):77-79 .
145. Garcia-Darennes F, Darennes J, Freidel M, Breton P. Protocol for
adapting treatment with vitamin K antagonists before dental
extraction [in French]. Rev Stomatol Chir Maxillofac . 2003;104(2):
69-72.
146. Morimoto Y, Niwa H, Minematsu K, Morimoto Y, Niwa H,
Minematsu K. Hemostatic management of tooth extractions in
patients on oral antithrombotic therapy. J Oral Maxillofac Surg .
2008;66(1):51-57.
147. Campbell JH, Alvarado F, Murray RA. Anticoagulation and minor
oral surgery: should the anticoagulation regimen be altered? J Oral
Maxillofac Surg . 2000;58(2):131-135; discussion 135-136 .
148. Bodner L, Weinstein JM, Baumgarten AK. Ef ﬁcacy of ﬁbrin sealant
in patients on various levels of oral anticoagulant undergoing oral
surgery. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod .
1998;86(4):421-424.
149. de Andrade NK, Motta RHL, Bergamaschi CC, et al. Bleeding risk
in patients using oral anticoagulants undergoing surgical
procedures in dentistry: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Front Pharmacol . 2019;10:866 .
150. Owattanapanich D, Ungprasert P, Owattanapanich W. Ef ﬁcacy of
local tranexamic acid treatment for prevention of bleeding after
dental procedures: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Dent
Sci. 2019;14(1):21-26 .
151. Alcalay J. Cutaneous surgery in patients receiving warfarin therapy.
Dermatol Surg . 2001;27(8):756-758 .
152. Billingsley EM, Maloney ME. Intraoperative and postoperative
bleeding problems in patients taking warfarin, aspirin, and
nonsteroidal antiin ﬂammatory agents. A prospective study.
Dermatol Surg . 1997;23(5):381-383; discussion 384-385 .
153. Kargi E, Babuccu O, Hosnuter M, Babuccu B, Altinyazar C.
Complications of minor cutaneous surgery in patients under
anticoagulant treatment. Aesthetic Plast Surg . 2002;26(6):483-485 .
154. Syed S, Adams BB, Liao W, Pipitone M, Gloster H. A prospective
assessment of bleeding and international normalized ratio in
warfarin-anticoagulated patients having cutaneous surgery. JA m
Acad Dermatol . 2004;51(6):955-957 .
155. Konstantatos A. Anticoagulation and cataract surgery: a review of
the current literature. Anaesth Intensive Care . 2001;29(1):11-18 .
156. Makuloluwa AK, Tiew S, Briggs M. Peri-operative management of
ophthalmic patients on anti-thrombotic agents: a literature review.
Eye (Lond) . 2019;33(7):1044-1059 .
157. Hirschman DR, Morby LJ, Hirschman DR, Morby LJ. A study of
the safety of continued anticoagulation for cataract surgery
patients. Nursing Forum . 2006;41(1):30-37 .
158. Kallio H, Paloheimo M, Maunuksela EL. Haemorrhage and risk
factors associated with retrobulbar/peribulbar block: a prospective
study in 1383 patients. Br J Anaesth . 2000;85(5):708-711 .
159. Katz J, Feldman MA, Bass EB, et al. Risks and bene ﬁts of
anticoagulant and antiplatelet medication use before cataract
surgery. Ophthalmology. 2003;110(9):1784-1788 .
160. Lumme P, Laatikainen LT. Risk factors for intraoperative and early
postoperative complications in extracapsular cataract surgery. Eur J
Ophthalmol. 1994;4(3):151-158 .
161. Rotenstreich Y, Rubowitz A, Segev F, Jaeger-Roshu S, Assia EI.
Effect of warfarin therapy on bleeding during cataract surgery.
J Cataract Refract Surg . 2001;27(9):1344-1346 .
162. Kumar N, Jivan S, Pulpa V, Butler J, Khan MY. Intraoperative eye
position after sub-Tenon ’s anesthesia for cataract surgery. Can J
Ophthalmol. 2006;41(4):476-480 .
163. Jonas JB, Pakdaman B, Sauder G. Cataract surgery under systemic
anticoagulant therapy with coumarin. Eur J Ophthalmol .
2006;16(1):30-32.
164. Barequet IS, Sachs D, Priel A, et al. Phacoemulsi ﬁcation of cataract
in patients receiving Coumadin therapy: ocular and hematologic
risk assessment. Am J Ophthalmol . 2007;144(5):719-723 .
165. Kumar N, Jivan S, Thomas P, McLure H. Sub-Tenon ’s anesthesia
with aspirin, warfarin, and clopidogrel. J Cataract Refract Surg .
2006;32(6):1022-1025.
166. Robinson GA, Nylander A. Warfarin and cataract extraction. Br J
Ophthalmol. 1989;73(9):702-703 .
167. Birnie DH, Healey JS, Wells GA, et al. Pacemaker or de ﬁbrillator
surgery without interruption of anticoagulation. N Engl J Med .
2013;368(22):2084-2093.
168. Proietti R, Porto I, Levi M, et al. Risk of pocket hematoma in
patients on chronic anticoagulation with warfarin undergoing
electrophysiological device implantation: a comparison of different
chestjournal.org e239
peri-operative management strategies. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci .
2015;19(8):1461-1479.
169. Feng L, Li Y, Li J, Yu B. Oral anticoagulation continuation
compared with heparin bridging therapy among high risk patients
undergoing implantation of cardiac rhythm devices: a meta-
analysis. Thromb Haemost . 2012;108(6):1124-1131 .
170. Tischenko A, Gula LJ, Yee R, et al. Implantation of cardiac rhythm
devices without interruption of oral anticoagulation compared with
perioperative bridging with low-molecular weight heparin. Am
Heart J . 2009;158(2):252-256 .
171. Schulman S, Healey JS, Douketis JD, Delaney J, Morillo CA.
Reduced-dose warfarin or interrupted warfarin with heparin
bridging for pacemaker or de ﬁbrillator implantation: a randomized
trial. Thromb Res . 2014;134(4):814-818 .
172. Airaksinen KE, Korkeila P, Lund J, et al. Safety of pacemaker and
implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator implantation during
uninterrupted warfarin treatment — the FinPAC study. Int J
Cardiol. 2013;168(4):3679-3682 .
173. Pillarisetti J, Maybrook R, Parikh V, et al. Peri-procedural use of
direct anticoagulation agents during cardiac device implantation:
vitamin K antagonists vs direct oral anticoagulants. J Interv Card
Electrophysiol. 2020;58(2):141-146 .
174. Takeuchi Y, Mabe K, Shimodate Y, et al. Continuous
anticoagulation and cold snare polypectomy versus heparin
bridging and hot snare polypectomy in patients on anticoagulants
with subcentimeter polyps: a randomized controlled trial. Ann
Intern Med . 2019;171(4):229-237 .
175. Katholi RE, Nolan SP, McGuire LB. Living with prosthetic heart
valves. Subsequent noncardiac operations and the risk of
thromboembolism or hemorrhage. Am Heart J . 1976;92(2):
162-167.
176. Katholi RE, Nolan SP, McGuire LB. The management of
anticoagulation during noncardiac operations in patients with
prosthetic heart valves. A prospective study. Am Heart J .
1978;96(2):163-165.
177. O’Donnell MJ, Kearon C, Johnson J, et al. Brief communication:
preoperative anticoagulant activity after bridging low-molecular-
weight heparin for temporary interruption of warfarin. Ann Intern
Med. 2007;146(3):184-187 .
178. Douketis JD, Woods K, Foster GA, Crowther MA. Bridging
anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin after
interruption of warfarin therapy is associated with a residual
anticoagulant effect prior to surgery. Thromb Haemost. 2005;94(3):
528-531.
179. Dunn AS, Spyropoulos A, Turpie AG. Bridging therapy in patients
on long-term oral anticoagulants who require surgery: the
Prospective Peri-operative Enoxaparin Cohort Trial (PROSPECT).
J Thromb Haemost . 2004;5:2211-2218 .
180. Spyropoulos AC, Turpie AGG, Dunn AS, et al. Clinical outcomes
with unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin as
bridging therapy in patients on long-term oral anticoagulants: the
REGIMEN registry. J Thromb Haemost . 2006;4(6):1246-1252 .
181. Vink R, Rienstra M, van Dongen CJ, et al. Risk of
thromboembolism and bleeding after general surgery in patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation. Am J Cardiol . 2005;96(6):822-824 .
182. Douketis J. Perioperative anticoagulation management in patients
who are receiving oral anticoagulant therapy: a practical guide for
clinicians. Thromb Res . 2002;108(1):3-13 .
183. Tafur A, Douketis J. Perioperative management of anticoagulant
and antiplatelet therapy. Heart. 2018;104(17):1461-1467 .
184. Douketis J, Schulman S, Syed S. Reply to Dr Lessire et al. Reg
Anesth Pain Med . 2016;41(6):788 .
185. Schulman S, Carrier M, Lee AY, et al. Perioperative management of
dabigatran: a prospective cohort study. Circulation. 2015;132(3):
167-173.
186. Stollberger C, Finsterer J. Update on drug interactions with non-
vitamin-K-antagonist oral anticoagulants for stroke prevention in
elderly patients. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol . 2021;14(5):569-581 .
187. Li A, Li MK, Crowther M, Vazquez SR. Drug-drug interactions
with direct oral anticoagulants associated with adverse events in the
real world: a systematic review. Thromb Res . 2020;194:240-245 .
188. Qamar A, Vaduganathan M, Greenberger NJ, Giugliano RP. Oral
anticoagulation in patients with liver disease. J Am Coll Cardiol .
2018;71(19):2162-2175.
189. Lessire S, Doux ﬁls J, Dincq AS, Mullier F. Periprocedural
management of direct oral anticoagulants should be guided by
accurate laboratory tests. Reg Anesth Pain Med . 2016;41(6):787-788.
190. Tripodi A, Marongiu F, Moia M, et al. The vexed question of
whether or not to measure levels of direct oral anticoagulants
before surgery or invasive procedures. Intern Emerg Med .
2018;13(7):1029-1036.
191. Grifﬁths R, Babu S, Dixon P, et al. Guideline for the management of
hip fractures 2020: Guideline by the Association of Anaesthetists.
Anaesthesia. 2021;76(2):225-237 .
192. Adcock DM, Gosselin RC. The danger of relying on the APTT and
PT in patients on DOAC therapy, a potential patient safety issue.
Int J Lab Hematol . 2017;39(suppl 1):37-40 .
193. Cuker A, Siegal DM, Crowther MA, Garcia DA. Laboratory
measurement of the anticoagulant activity of the non-vitamin K
oral anticoagulants. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64(11):1128-1139 .
194. Albaladejo P, Bonhomme F, Blais N, et al. Management of direct
oral anticoagulants in patients undergoing elective surgeries and
invasive procedures: updated guidelines from the French Working
Group on Perioperative Hemostasis (GIHP) — September 2015.
Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med . 2017;36(1):73-76 .
195. Douxﬁls J, Adcock DM, Bates SM, et al. 2021 Update of the
International Council for Standardization in Haematology
Recommendations for Laboratory Measurement of Direct Oral
Anticoagulants. Thromb Haemost . 2021;121(8):1008-1020 .
196. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Duncan J, et al. Perioperative
management of patients with atrial ﬁbrillation receiving a direct
oral anticoagulant. JAMA Intern Med . 2019;179(11):1469-1478 .
197. Essebag V, Proietti R, Birnie DH, et al. Short-term dabigatran
interruption before cardiac rhythm device implantation: multi-
centre experience from the RE-LY trial. Europace. 2017;19(10):
1630-1636.
198. Nazha B, Pandya B, Cohen J, et al. Periprocedural outcomes of
direct oral anticoagulants versus warfarin in nonvalvular atrial
ﬁbrillation. Circulation. 2018;138(14):1402-1411 .
199. Nakamura K, Naito S, Sasaki T, et al. Uninterrupted vs. interrupted
periprocedural direct oral anticoagulants for catheter ablation of
atrial ﬁbrillation: a prospective randomized single-centre study on
post-ablation thrombo-embolic and haemorrhagic events.
Europace. 2019;21(2):259-267 .
200. Yu HT, Shim J, Park J, et al. When is it appropriate to stop non-
vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants before catheter ablation of
atrial ﬁbrillation? A multicentre prospective randomized study. Eur
Heart J . 2019;40(19):1531-1537 .
201. Reynolds MR, Allison JS, Natale A, et al. A prospective randomized
trial of apixaban dosing during atrial ﬁbrillation ablation: the
AEIOU trial. JACC Clin Electrophysiol . 2018;4(5):580-588 .
202. Barequet IS, Zehavi-Dorin T, Bourla N, Tamarin I, Moisseiev J,
Salomon O. Safety of cataract surgery in patients treated with the
new oral anticoagulants (NOACs). Graefes Arch Clin Exp
Ophthalmol. 2019;257(12):2671-2676 .
203. Sheikh MA, Kong X, Haymart B, et al. Comparison of temporary
interruption with continuation of direct oral anticoagulants for low
bleeding risk procedures. Thromb Res . 2021;203:27-32 .
204. Shaw J, de Wit C, Le Gal G, Carrier M. Thrombotic and bleeding
outcomes following perioperative interruption of direct oral
anticoagulants in patients with venous thromboembolic disease.
J Thromb Haemost . 2017;15(5):925-930 .
205. Shaw JR, Douketis J, Le Gal G, Carrier M. Periprocedural
interruption of anticoagulation in patients with cancer-associated
venous thromboembolism: an analysis of thrombotic and bleeding
outcomes. J Thromb Haemost . 2019;17(7):1171-1178 .
e240 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
206. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Bosch J, et al. Rivaroxaban with or
without aspirin in stable cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med .
2017;377(14):1319-1330.
207. Ferrandis R, Llau JV, Sanz JF, et al. Periprocedural direct oral
anticoagulant management: the RA-ACOD Prospective,
Multicenter Real-World Registry. TH Open . 2020;4(2):e127-e137 .
208. Birnie DH, Healey JS, Wells GA, et al. Continued vs. interrupted
direct oral anticoagulants at the time of device surgery, in patients
with moderate to high risk of arterial thrombo-embolic events
(BRUISE CONTROL-2). Eur Heart J . 2018;39(44):3973-3979 .
209. Dubois V, Dincq AS, Doux ﬁls J, et al. Perioperative management of
patients on direct oral anticoagulants. Thromb J . 2017;15:14 .
210. Squizzato A, Poli D, Barcellona D, et al. Management of DOAC in
patients undergoing planned surgery or invasive procedure: FCSA
position paper. Thromb Haemost . 2022;122(3):329-335 .
211. Tripodi A. To measure or not to measure direct oral anticoagulants
before surgery or invasive procedures: reply. J Thromb Haemost .
2016;14(12):2559-2561.
212. Spyropoulos AC, Al-Badri A, Sherwood MW, Douketis JD. To
measure or not to measure direct oral anticoagulants before surgery
or invasive procedures: comment. J Thromb Haemost . 2016;14(12):
2556-2559.
213. Tafur AJ, Clark NP, Spyropoulos AC, et al. Predictors of bleeding in
the perioperative anticoagulant use for surgery evaluation study.
J Am Heart Assoc . 2020;9(19):e017316 .
214. Shaw JR, Li N, Vanassche T, et al. Predictors of preprocedural
direct oral anticoagulant levels in patients having an elective
surgery or procedure. Blood Adv . 2020;4(15):3520-3527 .
215. Samuelson BT, Cuker A, Siegal DM, Crowther M, Garcia DA.
Laboratory assessment of the anticoagulant activity of direct oral
anticoagulants: a systematic review. Chest. 2017;151(1):127-138 .
216. Connors JM. Testing and monitoring direct oral anticoagulants.
Blood. 2018;132(19):2009-2015 .
217. Dager WE, Roberts AJ, Nishijima DK. Effect of low and moderate
dose FEIBA to reverse major bleeding in patients on direct oral
anticoagulants. Thromb Res . 2019;173:71-76 .
218. Gosselin RC, Adcock DM, Doux ﬁls J. An update on laboratory
assessment for direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs). Int J Lab
Hematol. 2019;41(suppl 1):33-39 .
219. Gosselin RC, Adcock DM, Bates SM, et al. International Council for
Standardization in Haematology (ICSH) recommendations for
laboratory measurement of direct oral anticoagulants. Thromb
Haemost. 2018;118(3):437-450 .
220. Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, van Ryn J, et al. Idarucizumab for
dabigatran reversal — full cohort analysis. N Engl J Med .
2017;377(5):431-441.
221. Connolly SJ, Crowther M, Eikelboom JW, et al. Full study report of
andexanet alfa for bleeding associated with factor Xa inhibitors.
N Engl J Med . 2019;380(14):1326-1335 .
222. Godier A, Martin AC, Leblanc I, et al. Peri-procedural management
of dabigatran and rivaroxaban: duration of anticoagulant
discontinuation and drug concentrations. Thromb Res. 2015;136(4):
763-768.
223. Harder S, Klinkhardt U, Alvarez JM. Avoidance of bleeding during
surgery in patients receiving anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet
therapy: pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic considerations.
Clin Pharmacokinet . 2004;43(14):963-981 .
224. Roth GJ, Majerus PW. The mechanism of the effect of aspirin on
human platelets. I. Acetylation of a particulate fraction protein.
J Clin Invest . 1975;56(3):624-632 .
225. Roth GJ, Stanford N, Majerus PW. Acetylation of prostaglandin
synthase by aspirin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1975;72(8):
3073-3076.
226. Dobesh PP, Oestreich JH. Ticagrelor: pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, clinical ef ﬁcacy, and safety. Pharmacotherapy.
2014;34(10):1077-1090.
227. Teng R. Ticagrelor: pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic and
pharmacogenetic pro ﬁle: an update. Clin Pharmacokinet .
2015;54(11):1125-1138.
228. Quinn MJ, Fitzgerald DJ. Ticlopidine and clopidogrel. Circulation.
1999;100(15):1667-1672.
229. Dobesh PP. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
prasugrel, a thienopyridine P2Y12 inhibitor. Pharmacotherapy.
2009;29(9):1089-1102.
230. von Beckerath N, Taubert D, Pogatsa-Murray G, Schomig E,
Kastrati A, Schomig A. Absorption, metabolization, and antiplatelet
effects of 300-, 600-, and 900-mg loading doses of clopidogrel:
results of the ISAR-CHOICE (Intracoronary Stenting and
Antithrombotic Regimen: Choose Between 3 High Oral Doses for
Immediate Clopidogrel Effect) trial. Circulation. 2005;112(19):
2946-2950.
231. Kandzari DE, Berger PB, Kastrati A, et al. In ﬂuence of treatment
duration with a 600-mg dose of clopidogrel before percutaneous
coronary revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2004;44(11):
2133-2136.
232. Lenz TL, Hilleman DE. Aggrenox: a ﬁxed-dose combination of
aspirin and dipyridamole. Ann Pharmacother . 2000;34(11):
1283-1290.
233. Schror K. The pharmacology of cilostazol. Diabetes Obes Metab .
2002;4(suppl 2):S14-S19 .
234. Ward A, Clissold SP. Pentoxifylline. A review of its
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties, and its
therapeutic ef ﬁcacy. Drugs. 1987;34(1):50-97 .
235. Perez-Rivera JA, Monedero-Campo J, Cieza-Borrella C, Ruiz-
Perez P. Pharmacokinetic drug evaluation of vorapaxar for
secondary prevention after acute coronary syndrome. Expert Opin
Drug Metab Toxicol . 2017;13(3):339-350 .
236. Brogden RN. Non-steroidal anti-in ﬂammatory analgesics other
than salicylates. Drugs. 1986;32(Suppl 4):27-45 .
237. Gulpinar K, Ozdemir S, Ozis E, Sahli Z, Demirtas S, Korkmaz A.
A preliminary study: aspirin discontinuation before elective
operations; when is the optimal timing? J Korean Surg Soc .
2013;85(4):185-190.
238. Prevention of pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis with
low dose aspirin: Pulmonary Embolism Prevention (PEP) trial.
Lancet. 2000;355(9212):1295-1302 .
239. Oscarsson A, Gupta A, Fredrikson M, et al. To continue or
discontinue aspirin in the perioperative period: a randomized,
controlled clinical trial. Br J Anaesth . 2010;104(3):305-312 .
240. Devereaux PJ, Mrkobrada M, Sessler DI, et al. Aspirin in patients
undergoing noncardiac surgery. N Engl J Med . 2014;370(16):
1494-1503.
241. Catella-Lawson F, Reilly MP, Kapoor SC, et al. Cyclooxygenase
inhibitors and the antiplatelet effects of aspirin. N Engl J Med .
2001;345(25):1809-1817.
242. Mantz J, Samama CM, Tubach F, et al. Impact of preoperative
maintenance or interruption of aspirin on thrombotic and bleeding
events after elective non-cardiac surgery: the multicentre,
randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled, STRATAGEM trial. Br J
Anaesth. 2011;107(6):899-910 .
243. Tytgat SH, Laman DM, Rijken AM, et al. Emboli rate during and
early after carotid endarterectomy after a single preoperative dose
of 120 mg acetylsalicylic acid — a prospective double-blind placebo
controlled randomised trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg . 2005;29(2):
156-161.
244. Antolovic D, Rakow A, Contin P, et al. A randomised controlled
pilot trial to evaluate and optimize the use of anti-platelet agents in
the perioperative management in patients undergoing general and
abdominal surgery — the APAP trial (ISRCTN45810007).
Langenbecks Arch Surg . 2012;397(2):297-306 .
245. Engheta A, Hadadi Abianeh S, Atri A, Sanatkarfar M. Aspirin use
and bleeding volume in skin cancer patients undergoing surgery: a
randomized controlled trial. Daru. 2016;24(1):20 .
chestjournal.org e241
246. Sharma AK, Ajani AE, Hamwi SM, et al. Major noncardiac surgery
following coronary stenting: when is it safe to operate? Catheter
Cardiovasc Interv . 2004;63(2):141-145 .
247. Reddy PR, Vaitkus PT. Risks of noncardiac surgery after coronary
stenting. Am J Cardiol . 2005;95(6):755-757 .
248. Ernst A, Eberhardt R, Wahidi M, et al. Effect of routine clopidogrel
use on bleeding complications after transbronchial biopsy in
humans. Chest. 2006;129(3):734-737 .
249. Dacey LJ, Munoz JJ, Johnson ER, et al. Effect of preoperative
aspirin use on mortality in coronary artery bypass grafting patients.
Ann Thorac Surg . 2000;70(6):1986-1990 .
250. Myles PS, Smith J, Knight J, et al. Aspirin and Tranexamic Acid for
Coronary Artery Surgery (ATACAS) trial: rationale and design. Am
Heart J . 2008;155(2):224-230 .
251. Mehta RH, Roe MT, Mulgund J, et al. Acute clopidogrel use and
outcomes in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute
coronary syndromes undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery.
J Am Coll Cardiol . 2006;48(2):281-286 .
252. Fox KA, Mehta SR, Peters R, et al. Bene ﬁts and risks of the
combination of clopidogrel and aspirin in patients undergoing
surgical revascularization for non-ST-elevation acute coronary
syndrome: the Clopidogrel in Unstable angina to prevent Recurrent
ischemic Events (CURE) Trial. Circulation. 2004;110(10):
1202-1208.
253. Purkayastha S, Athanasiou T, Malinovski V, et al. Does clopidogrel
affect outcome after coronary artery bypass grafting? A meta-
analysis. Heart. 2006;92(4):531-532 .
254. Hongo RH, Ley J, Dick SE, Yee RR. The effect of clopidogrel in
combination with aspirin when given before coronary artery bypass
grafting. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2002;40(2):231-237 .
255. Chen L, Bracey AW, Radovancevic R, et al. Clopidogrel and
bleeding in patients undergoing elective coronary artery bypass
grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2004;128(3):425-431 .
256. Held C, Asenblad N, Bassand JP, et al. Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel
in patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoing coronary
artery bypass surgery: results from the PLATO (Platelet Inhibition
and Patient Outcomes) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2011;57(6):672-684.
257. Cao C, Indraratna P, Ang SC, et al. Should clopidogrel be
discontinued before coronary artery bypass grafting for patients
with acute coronary syndrome? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014;148(6):3092-3098 .
258. Nouraei SM, Gholipour Baradari A, Emami Zeydi A. Does early
post-operative administration of aspirin in ﬂuence the risk of
bleeding after coronary artery bypass graft surgery? A prospective
observational study. Med Arch . 2015;69(6):381-383 .
259. Geiger J, Teichmann L, Grossmann R, et al. Monitoring of
clopidogrel action: comparison of methods. Clin Chem. 2005;51(6):
957-965.
260. Steinhubl SR, Talley JD, Braden GA, et al. Point-of-care measured
platelet inhibition correlates with a reduced risk of an adverse
cardiac event after percutaneous coronary intervention: results of
the GOLD (AU-Assessing Ultegra) multicenter study. Circulation.
2001;103(21):2572-2578.
261. Keeler BD, Simpson JA, Fox SC, et al. An observational study
investigating the effect of platelet function on outcome after
colorectal surgery. Int J Surg . 2015;17:28-33 .
262. Watson HG, Greaves M. Can we predict bleeding? Semin Thromb
Hemost. 2008;34(1):97-103 .
263. Price MJ, Price MJ. Monitoring platelet function to reduce the risk
of ischemic and bleeding complications. Am J Cardiol .
2009;103(suppl 3):35A-39A .
264. Nuttall GA, Brown MJ, Stombaugh JW, et al. Time and cardiac risk
of surgery after bare-metal stent percutaneous coronary
intervention. Anesthesiology. 2008;109(4):588-595 .
265. Rabbitts JA, Nuttall GA, Brown MJ, et al. Cardiac risk of
noncardiac surgery after percutaneous coronary intervention with
drug-eluting stents. Anesthesiology. 2008;109(4):596-604 .
266. Brotman DJ, Bakhru M, Saber W, et al. Discontinuation of
antiplatelet therapy prior to low-risk noncardiac surgery in patients
with drug-eluting stents: a retrospective cohort study. J Hosp Med .
2007;2(6):378-384.
267. Compton PA, Zankar AA, Adesanya AO, Banerjee S, Brilakis ES.
Risk of noncardiac surgery after coronary drug-eluting stent
implantation. Am J Cardiol . 2006;98(9):1212-1213 .
268. Schouten O, van Domburg RT, Bax JJ, et al. Noncardiac surgery
after coronary stenting: early surgery and interruption of
antiplatelet therapy are associated with an increase in major adverse
cardiac events. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49(1):122-124 .
269. Anwaruddin S, Askari AT, Saudye H, et al. Characterization of
post-operative risk associated with prior drug-eluting stent use.
JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2009;2(6):542-549 .
270. Graham MM, Sessler DI, Parlow JL, et al. Aspirin in patients
with previous percutaneous coronary intervention
undergoing noncardiac surgery. A n nI n t e r nM e d.
2018;168(4):237-244 .
271. Albaladejo P, Marret E, Samama CM, et al. Non-cardiac surgery in
patients with coronary stents: the RECO study. Heart. 2011;97(19):
1566-1572.
272. Rodriguez A, Guilera N, Mases A, et al. Management of antiplatelet
therapy in patients with coronary stents undergoing noncardiac
surgery: association with adverse events. Br J Anaesth . 2018;120(1):
67-76.
273. Childers CP, Maggard-Gibbons M, Ulloa JG, et al. Perioperative
management of antiplatelet therapy in patients undergoing non-
cardiac surgery following coronary stent placement: a systematic
review. Syst Rev . 2018;7(1):4 .
274. Holcomb CN, Graham LA, Richman JS, et al. The incremental risk
of noncardiac surgery on adverse cardiac events following coronary
stenting. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64(25):2730-2739 .
275. Egholm G, Kristensen SD, Thim T, et al. Risk associated with
surgery within 12 months after coronary drug-eluting stent
implantation. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2016;68(24):2622-2632 .
276. Rossini R, Tarantini G, Musumeci G, et al. A multidisciplinary
approach on the perioperative antithrombotic management of
patients with coronary stents undergoing surgery: surgery after
stenting 2. JACC Cardiovasc Interv . 2018;11(5):417-434 .
277. Firstenberg MS, Dyke CM, Angiolillo DJ, et al. Safety and ef ﬁcacy
of cangrelor, an intravenous, short-acting platelet inhibitor in
patients requiring coronary artery bypass surgery. Heart Surg
Forum. 2013;16(2):E60-E69 .
278. Angiolillo DJ, Firstenberg MS, Price MJ, et al. Bridging antiplatelet
therapy with cangrelor in patients undergoing cardiac surgery: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2012;307(3):265-274 .
279. Tanaka A, Ishii H, Tatami Y, et al. Unfractionated heparin during the
interruption of antiplatelet therapy for non-cardiac surgery after
drug-eluting stent implantation. Intern Med. 2016;55(4):333-337.
280. Capodanno D, Musumeci G, Lettieri C, et al. Impact of bridging
with perioperative low-molecular-weight heparin on cardiac and
bleeding outcomes of stented patients undergoing non-cardiac
surgery. Thromb Haemost . 2015;114(2):423-431 .
281. Savonitto S, D ’Urbano M, Caracciolo M, et al. Urgent surgery in
patients with a recently implanted coronary drug-eluting stent: a
phase II study of ‘bridging’ antiplatelet therapy with tiro ﬁban
during temporary withdrawal of clopidogrel. Br J Anaesth .
2010;104(3):285-291.
282. Wilczynski M, Bochenek T, Goral J, et al. Use of epti ﬁbatide in
patients with acute stent thrombosis, requiring urgent surgical
revascularisation— report of 2 cases [in Polish]. Kardiol Pol .
2009;67(11):1313-1316.
283. Dargham BB, Baskar A, Tejani I, et al. Intravenous antiplatelet
therapy bridging in patients undergoing cardiac or non-cardiac
surgery following percutaneous coronary intervention. Cardiovasc
Revasc Med . 2019;20(9):805-811 .
284. De Servi S, Morici N, Boschetti E, et al. Bridge therapy or standard
treatment for urgent surgery after coronary stent implantation:
analysis of 314 patients. Vascul Pharmacol . 2016;80:85-90 .
285. Walker EA, Dager WE. Bridging with tiro ﬁban during oral
antiplatelet interruption: a single-center case series analysis
e242 Guidelines and Consensus Statements [ 162#5 CHEST NOVEMBER 2022 ]
including patients on hemodialysis. Pharmacotherapy. 2017;37(8):
888-892.
286. Ardekian L, Gaspar R, Peled M, Brener B, Laufer D. Does low-dose
aspirin therapy complicate oral surgical procedures? J Am Dent
Assoc. 2000;131(3):331-335 .
287. Brennan MT, Valerin MA, Noll JL, et al. Aspirin use and post-
operative bleeding from dental extractions. J Dental Res. 2008;87(8):
740-744.
288. Napenas JJ, Hong CH, Brennan MT, et al. The frequency of
bleeding complications after invasive dental treatment in patients
receiving single and dual antiplatelet therapy. J Am Dental Assoc .
2009;140(6):690-695.
289. M a d a nG A ,M a d a nS G ,M a d a nG ,M a d a nA D .M i n o ro r a l
surgery without stopping daily low-dose aspirin therapy: a
study of 51 patients. J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 2005;63(9):
1262-1265 .
290. Medeiros FB, de Andrade AC, Angelis GA, et al. Bleeding
evaluation during single tooth extraction in patients with coronary
artery disease and acetylsalicylic acid therapy suspension: a
prospective, double-blinded, and randomized study. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg . 2011;69(12):2949-2955 .
291. Bartlett GR. Does aspirin affect the outcome of minor cutaneous
surgery? Br J Plast Surg . 1999;52(3):214-216 .
292. Shalom A, Wong L. Outcome of aspirin use during excision of
cutaneous lesions. Ann Plast Surg . 2003;50(3):296-298 .
293. Narendran N, Williamson TH. The effects of aspirin and warfarin
therapy on haemorrhage in vitreoretinal surgery. Acta Ophthalmol
Scand. 2003;81(1):38-40 .
294. Winkler KP, Beaulieu R, Bevill L, Mishulin A, Black EH. Effects of
aspirin on postoperative bruising and bleeding complications in
upper eyelid surgery. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg . 2020;36(6):
575-578.
295. Isted A, Cooper L, Colville RJ. Bleeding on the cutting edge: a
systematic review of anticoagulant and antiplatelet continuation in
minor cutaneous surgery. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg . 2018;71(4):
455-467.
chestjournal.org e243
Update
Chest
Volume 164, Issue 1, July 2023, Page 267
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2023.05.019DOI:
Corrigendum to:
CHEST. 2022;162(5):e207-e243
The November 2022 guideline entitled “Perioperative
Management of Antithrombotic Therapy: An American
College of Chest Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline ”
contained risk classi ﬁcation schemes for
thromboembolism and surgery/procedure-related
bleeding that were empiric but not prospectively
validated. To provide more clarity and to prevent
misinterpretation, the authors have issued the following
changes to Table 1:
/C15The title of the table has been changed from “Adapted
American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST)
Suggested Risk Strati ﬁcation for Patient-Speci ﬁc
Periprocedural Thromboembolism ” to “Suggested
Risk Strati ﬁcation for Patient-speci ﬁc Periprocedural
Thromboembolism” and additional permission
information has been included.
/C15A footnote (cited in the Table title) has been
added, labeled as footnote a: “Empiric risk strati-
ﬁcation that is a starting point for assessing
perioperative thromboembolism risk; should be
combined with clinical judgment that incorporates
individual patient- and surgery/procedure-related
factors.”
/C15In row 2, column 2, the following has been added to
the moderate risk category for “Mechanical Heart
Valve”: “Mitral valve without risk factors for stroke. ”
/C15Footnote c has been incorporated into footnote b.
Footnote b (cited after “risk factors for stroke ” in the
low and moderate risk categories) now reads, “In-
cludes AF, prior stroke/TIA during anticoagulant
interruption or other prior stroke/TIA, prior valve
thrombosis, rheumatic heart disease, hypertension,
diabetes, congestive heart failure, and age $ 75 years.”
/C15Footnote a, “Includes pancreatic cancer, myelopro-
liferative disorders, primary brain cancer, gastric
cancer, and esophageal cancer ” (cited after “Active
cancer associated with high VTE risk ” in the high-risk
category), has been relabeled as footnote c.
The online version of this article has been corrected.
Related Article DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2022.07.025
[ Corrigendum ]
chestjournal.org 267