June 29, 2023
American Society of Anesthesiologists
Consensus-Based Guidance on 
Preoperative Management of Patients
on Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) 
Receptor Agonists
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists are approved by the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular risk reduction in this cohort. In addition, GLP-1 receptor agonists are also 
used for weight loss. 
The GLP-1 agonists are associated with adverse gastrointestinal effects such as nausea, vomiting and delayed gastric 
emptying. Based on recent anecdotal reports, there are concerns that delayed gastric emptying from GLP-1 agonists 
can increase the risk of regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents during general anesthesia and deep 
sedation. The presence of adverse gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal distension) in 
patients taking GLP-1 agonists are predictive of increased residual gastric contents. The effects on gastric emptying are 
reported to be reduced with long-term use.
The use of GLP-1 agonists in pediatrics has primarily been reported for the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus 
and obesity. The published literature on GLP-1 agonists in pediatrics is predominantly from pediatric patients 10-18 
years old; concerns are like those reported in adults. 
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Task Force on Preoperative Fasting reviewed the available literature 
on GLP-1 agonists and associated gastrointestinal adverse effects, including the consequences of delayed gastric 
emptying. The evidence to provide guidance for preoperative management of these drugs to prevent regurgitation and 
pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents is sparse limited only to several case reports. Nevertheless, given the 
concerns of GLP-1 agonists- induced delayed gastric emptying and associated high risk of regurgitation and aspiration 
of gastric contents, the task force suggests the following for elective procedures. For patients requiring urgent or 
emergent procedures, proceed and treat the patient as ‘full stomach’ and manage accordingly. 
 
For patients scheduled for elective procedures consider the following: 
DAY(S) PRIOR TO THE PROCEDURE: 
•
•
•
For patients on daily dosing consider holding GLP-1 agonists on the day of the
procedure/surgery. For patients on weekly dosing consider holding GLP-1
agonists a week prior to the procedure/surgery
This suggestion is irrespective of the indication (type 2 diabetes mellitus or weight
loss), dose, or the type of procedure/surgery
If GLP-1 agonists prescribed for diabetes management are held for longer than
the dosing schedule, consider consulting an endocrinologist for bridging the
antidiabetic therapy to avoid hyperglycemia
DAY OF THE PROCEDURE: 
•
•
•
•
If gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms such as severe nausea/vomiting/retching,
abdominal bloating, or abdominal pain are present, consider delaying elective
procedure, and discuss the concerns of potential risk of regurgitation and
pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents with the proceduralist/surgeon and the
patient
If the patient has no GI symptoms, and the GLP-1 agonists have been held as
advised, proceed as usual
If the patient has no GI symptoms, but the GLP-1 agonists were not held as
advised, proceed with ‘full stomach’ precautions, or consider evaluating gastric
volume by ultrasound, if possible and if proficient with the technique. If the
stomach is empty, proceed as usual. If the stomach is full or if gastric ultrasound
inconclusive or not possible, consider delaying the procedure or treat the patient
as ‘full stomach’ and manage accordingly. Discuss the concerns of potential risk of
regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents with the
proceduralist/surgeon and the patient
There is no evidence to suggest the optimal duration of fasting for patients on
GLP-1 agonists. Therefore, until we have adequate evidence, we suggest
following the current ASA fasting guidelines
